FOREWORD
Any prequel story presents a unique challenge, never mind one set in a
fictional canonical universe like that of Avatar: The Last Airbender. A
common pitfall of prequels? Since the reader already knows how things
eventually turn out, they are one step ahead of the hero. Done well,
however, a prequel can expand and deepen a beloved fantasy world by
exploring its history and characters in new ways. This is the case with The
Rise of Kyoshi.
Readers familiar with the original Nickelodeon series might recall that
Avatar Kyoshi was a legend, even among the impressive pantheon of
Avatars. But how did she become a woman dedicated to fighting injustice
throughout the world? And why was she so feared by her enemies? These
were the questions left unexplored. In my first talks with F. C. Yee, we
discussed a few possible plots but also asked ourselves: What kind of
character is Kyoshi, what drives her, and what kind of events in her past
could have caused her to develop into such a legendary figure?
I didn’t envy Yee the challenge of tackling these questions. I knew he’d
have to play within the conventions of an already-established world while
simultaneously marking it with his own creative stamp. And the Avatar
universe has no shortage of “must-haves.” First, you must have an Avatar—
the reincarnated being who holds the ability to manipulate, or bend, all four
elements, who has a connection to the mysterious Spirit World, and who
deals with conflicts among the Water Tribes, Earth Kingdom, Fire Nation,
and Air Nomads. The Avatar can’t do all this alone and thus must also have
a core group of teachers and friends—a Team Avatar, as we like to call it.
Political conflict is also a must: Whether it’s a world war or a revolution,
the Avatar inevitably ends up in the center of the fight before he or she is
ready. And of course, there is never a shortage of epic bending battles.
Though all Avatars share certain rites of passage—such as mastering all
four elements—each one must have a unique journey and face different
personal and political challenges on their way to becoming a fully realized
Avatar. In The Rise of Kyoshi, we meet a young woman so unlike the legend
she is to become that we wonder how she could possibly transform into
such a remarkable figure. She’s not a great Earthbender. People don’t even
believe she’s the Avatar at the start of the book—a great conceit on Yee’s
behalf, and one that provides the crux of the conflict for the entire novel.
Entrusting another writer with a world and characters that I helped
create is always fraught with anxiety for me. In the wrong hands, it can be a
disheartening experience. But when I read The Rise of Kyoshi for the first
time, I was immediately drawn into the story and entranced by its intriguing
new characters and backstory. I was eager to read on to find out how
Kyoshi would overcome all the obstacles in her way (and Yee throws plenty
of them in her path).
Working on this project with everyone involved has been a pleasure,
and I couldn’t be more excited about this incarnation of the Avatar universe.
Michael Dante DiMartino
