HONEST WORK
Stepping through the gate of the mansion was like entering a portal to the
Spirit World. Or so Kyoshi imagined, from hearing Kelsang’s stories. It was
a complete transition from one set of rules to another, from a dull, mindless
place where the only currencies you could spend were sweat and time,
sowing your seeds and baiting your hooks in the hope of staving off hunger
for another season, to a mystical universe where rituals and negotiations
could make you supreme in a single day.
Their passage was marked by the cool blip of shade underneath the
rammed-earth wall. Rangi nodded at the two watchmen, grizzled veterans
of the Earth King’s army who stiffened their necks and bowed back to her
in deference. Lured by better pay into Jianzhu’s service, they’d kept their
dished, wide-brimmed helmets but painted them over with the sage’s
personal shades of green. Kyoshi always wondered whether that was
against the law or not.
Inside, the vast garden hummed with conversation. Sages and
dignitaries from far-off lands constantly flowed in and out of the estate, and
many of them enjoyed conducting their business among the flowers and
sweet-smelling fruit trees. An overdressed merchant from Omashu haggled
with a Fire Nation procurement officer over cabbage futures, ignoring the
cherry blossom petals falling into their tea. Two elegant Northern Water
Tribe women, arm in arm, meditatively walked a maze pattern raked into a
field of pure-white sand. In the corner, a morose young man with carefully
disheveled hair bit the end of his brush, struggling with a poem.
Any of them could have been—and probably were—benders of the
highest order. It always gave Kyoshi a thrill to see so many masters of the
elements gathered in one place. When the estate was full of visitors, like
today, the air felt alive with power. Sometimes literally so when Kelsang
was around and in a playful mood.
Auntie Mui, head of the kitchen staff, appeared from one of the side
hallways and bounced over to them, looking like a plum rolling down a
bumpy hill. She used her momentum to deliver a hard swat to the small of
Kyoshi’s back. Kyoshi yelped and gripped the jar tighter.
“Don’t carry food around where the guests can see it!” Auntie Mui
hissed. “Use the service entrance!”
She hustled Kyoshi down the steps of a tunnel, oblivious to the hard
bump Kyoshi’s forehead took against the top support beam. They shuffled
down the corridor that still smelled of sawdust and wet loam through the
plaster. It was more obvious down here how new and hastily constructed the
complex really was.
The roughness of the hallway was another of the many little details that
poked holes in the common illusion those under Jianzhu’s roof tried to
uphold, from his most exalted guest down to his lowliest employee. The
Avatar’s presence was an uncomfortably recent blessing. Everyone was
going through the motions at an accelerated pace.
“You were out in the sun too much, weren’t you?” Auntie Mui said.
“Your freckles got darker again. Why don’t you ever wear that concealer I
gave you? It has real crushed nacre in it.”
Kyoshi’s skull throbbed. “What, and look like a bloodless ghost?”
“Better than looking like someone sprinkled starpoppy seeds over your
cheeks!”
About the only things Kyoshi hated more than gunk on her skin were
the warped, infuriating values that older folks like Auntie Mui held around
complexion. It was yet another contradiction of the village, that you should
make an honest living toiling under the sun but never in the slightest look
like it. In the game of rural Yokoyan beauty standards, Kyoshi had lost that
particular round. Among others.
They climbed another set of stairs, Kyoshi remembering to duck this
time, and passed through a hall for drying and splitting the immense amount
of firewood needed to fuel the stoves. Auntie Mui tsk’ed at the splitting
maul that had been buried in the chopping block by the last person to use it
instead of being hung up properly on the wall, but she wasn’t strong enough
to pull it out, and Kyoshi’s hands were full.
They entered the steamy, cavernous kitchen. The clash of metal pans
and roaring flames could have been mistaken for a siege operation. Kyoshi
set the pickling jar down on the nearest clear table and took a needed
stretch, her arms wobbling with unfamiliar freedom. The jar had been
attached to her for so long it felt like saying goodbye to a needy child.
“Don’t forget, you have gift duties tonight.”
She was startled to hear Rangi’s voice. She didn’t think the Firebender
would have followed her this deep into the bowels of the house.
Rangi glanced around. “Don’t waste too much time here. You’re not a
scullery maid.”
The nearby kitchen staff, some of whom were scullery maids, looked at
them and scowled. Kyoshi winced. The villagers thought she was stuck up
for living in the mansion; the other servants thought she was stuck up for
her closeness to Yun; and Rangi, with her elite attitude, only made it worse.
There was no pleasing anyone, she thought as Rangi departed for the
barracks.
Kyoshi spotted an odd figure among the legions of white-clad cooks
pounding away at their stations. An Airbender, with his orange robes rolled
up to his blocky shoulders. His massive paws were covered in flour, and
he’d tucked his forest of a beard into his tunic to keep it from shedding. It
was like the kitchen had been invaded by a mountain ogre.
Kelsang should have been aboveground, watching the Avatar. Or at least
greeting a visiting sage. Not cutting out dumpling wrappers among the
cooks.
He looked up and grinned when he saw Kyoshi. “I’ve been banished,”
he said, preempting her question. “Jianzhu thinks my presence is causing
Yun to prematurely dream about airbending, so we’re trying to keep him
focused on one element at a time. I needed to feel useful, so here I am.”
Kyoshi sidled her way over to him through the crowded space and gave
the monk a kiss on the cheek. “Let me help.” She washed her hands in a
nearby sink, grabbed a ball of dough to knead, and fell into work beside
him.
For the past decade, Kelsang had essentially raised her. He’d used what
leeway he had with the Southern Air Temple to reside in Yokoya as much
as he could, in order to look after Kyoshi. When he had to leave, he foisted
her upon different families, begged alms to keep her fed. After Jianzhu
brought the Avatar to Yokoya for safekeeping, Kelsang twisted his old
friend’s arm to hire Kyoshi on.
He’d done all this, saved the life of a child stranger, for no reason other
than that she needed someone. In a part of the Earth Kingdom where love
was reserved solely for blood relations, the monk from a foreign land was
the dearest person in the world to Kyoshi.
Which was why she knew his good cheer right now was completely
fake.
Rumors flew around the house that the once-legendary friendship
between Avatar Kuruk’s companions had deteriorated. Especially so
between Jianzhu and Kelsang. In the years since Kuruk’s death, if the
gossip was to be believed, Jianzhu had amassed wealth and influence
unbecoming of a sage who was supposed to be dedicated solely to guiding
Kuruk’s reincarnation. Bending masters came to the house to pay obeisance
to him, not the Avatar, and decrees that were normally made by the Earth
Kings instead bore Jianzhu’s seal. Kelsang disapproved of such power-
hungry actions and was at risk of being completely shunted to the side.
Kyoshi didn’t have context around the politics, but she did worry about
the growing rift between the two master benders. It couldn’t be good for the
Avatar. Yun adored Kelsang almost as much as she did, but ultimately was
loyal to the earth sage who’d found him.
Distracted by her thoughts, she didn’t notice the little puff of flour fly
up from the table and hit her in the forehead. White dust clouded her vision.
She squinted at Kelsang, who wasn’t trying to hide the second shot that
spun around above his palm, chambered in a pocket-sized whirlwind he’d
summoned.
“It wasn’t me,” he said. “It was a different Airbender.”
Kyoshi snickered and grabbed the flour bead out of the air. It burst
between her fingers. “Quit it before Auntie Mui throws us out of here.”
“Then quit looking troubled on my behalf,” he said, having read her
mind. “It’s not so bad if I take a break from Avatar business. I’ll get to
spend more time with you. We should go on a vacation, the two of us,
perhaps to see the Air Nomad sacred sites.”
She would have liked that very much. Chances to share Kelsang’s
company had gotten rarer as the Avatar and his teachers sank deeper into
the mesh of world affairs. But as lowly as her own job was in comparison,
she still had the same responsibility to show up every day.
“I can’t,” Kyoshi said. “I have work.” There’d be time enough in the
future for traveling with Kelsang.
He rolled his eyes. “Bah. I’ve never seen someone so averse to fun since
old Abbot ‘No-Fruit Pies’ Dorje.” He flicked another blob of flour at her,
and she failed to flinch out of the way.
“I know how to have fun!” Kyoshi whispered indignantly as she wiped
her nose with the back of her wrist.
From the head of the cutting board tables, Auntie Mui gave a tongue-
curled whistle, interrupting their debate. “Poetry time!” she said.
Everyone groaned. She was always trying to enforce high culture on her
workers, or at least her idea of it. “Lee!” she said, singling out an
unfortunate wok handler. “You start us off.”
The poor line cook stumbled as he tried to compose on the spot while
keeping count of his syllables. “Uh . . . the-weath-er-is-nice / sun-shin-ing-
down-from-the-sky / birds-are-sing-ing . . . good?”
Auntie Mui made a face like she’d swigged pure lemon juice. “That was
awful! Where’s your sense of balance? Symmetry? Contrast?”
Lee threw his hands in the air. He was paid to fry things, not perform in
the Upper Ring of Ba Sing Se.
“Can’t someone give us a decent verse?” Auntie Mui complained. There
were no volunteers.
“I’ve got cheeks like ripe round fruit,” Kelsang suddenly pitched forth.
“They shake like boughs in the storm / I blush bright red when I see a bed /
and leap at the sound of the horn.”
The room exploded in laughter. He’d picked a well-known shanty
popular with sailors and field hands, where you improvised raunchy words
from the perspective of your object of unrequited affection. It was a game
for others to guess who you were singing about, and the simple rhythm
made manual labor more pleasant.
“Brother Kelsang!” Auntie Mui said, scandalized. “Set an example!”
He had. The entire staff was already chopping, kneading, and scrubbing
to the raucous tune. It was okay to misbehave if a monk did it first.
“I’ve got a nose like a dove-tailed deer / I run like a leaf on the wind,”
Lee sang, evidently better at this than haiku. “My arms are slight and my
waist is tight / and I don’t have a thought for my kin.”
“Mirai!” a dishwasher yelled out. “He’s got it bad for the greengrocer’s
daughter!” The staff whooped over Lee’s protests, thinking it a good match.
Sometimes it didn’t matter to the audience if they guessed right or not.
“Kyoshi next!” someone said. “She’s never here, so let’s make the most
of it!”
Kyoshi was caught off guard. Normally she wasn’t included in
household antics. She caught Kelsang’s eye and saw the challenge
twinkling there. Fun, eh? Prove it.
Before she could stop herself, the rhythm launched her into song.
“I’ve got two knives that are cast in bronze / they pierce all the way to
the soul / they draw you in with the promise of sin / like the moth to the
flame to the coal.”
The kitchen howled. Auntie Mui clucked in disapproval. “Keep going,
you naughty girl!” Lee shouted, glad that the attention was off him.
She’d even managed to throw off Kelsang, who looked at her curiously,
as if he had a spark of recognition for whom she was describing. Kyoshi
knew that wasn’t possible when she was simply tossing out the first words
that came to her head. She thumped a length of dough onto the table in front
of her, creating her own percussion.
“I’ve got hair like the starless night / it sticks to my lips when I smile /
I’ll wind it with yours and we’ll drift off course / in a ship touching hearts
all the while.”
Somehow the improvisation was easy, though she’d never considered
herself a poet. Or a bawdy mind, for that matter. It was as if another person,
someone much more at ease with their own desires, was feeding her the
right lines to express herself. And to her surprise, she liked how the
inelegant lines made her feel. Truthful and silly and raw.
“For the way I walk is a lantern lit / that leads you into the night / I’ll
hold you close and love you the most / until our end is in sight.”
Kyoshi didn’t have time to ponder the darker turn her verse took before
a sudden pain shot through her wrist.
Kelsang had grabbed her arm and was staring at her, eyes wild and
white. His grip squeezed tighter and tighter, crushing her flesh, his nails
drawing blood from both her skin and his.
“You’re hurting me!” she cried out.
The room was silent. Disbelieving. Kelsang let go, and she caught
herself on the edge of the table. A map of purple was stamped on her wrist.
“Kyoshi,” Kelsang said, his voice constricted and airless. “Kyoshi,
where did you learn THAT SONG?”
