REVELATIONS
After Kelsang took her aside into an empty study and spent half an hour
tearfully apologizing for hurting her, he told her why he’d lost control.
“Oh,” Kyoshi said in response to the worst news she’d ever heard in her
life.
She ran her fingers through her hair and threw her head back. The
library where they were hiding was taller than it was long, a mineshaft
cramped with scrolls, yanked off the shelves and put back without care.
Beams of sunlight revealed how much dust was floating around the room.
She needed to clean this place up.
“You’re mistaken,” she said to Kelsang. “Yun is the Avatar. Jianzhu
identified him nearly two years ago. Everyone knows this.”
Kelsang didn’t look any happier than she did. “You don’t understand.
After Kuruk died, the Earthen traditions around locating the Avatar fell
apart. Imagine if the seasons suddenly refused to turn. It was chaos. After
so many failures, the sages, Earthbenders especially, felt abandoned by the
spirits and their ancestors alike.”
Kyoshi leaned back against a ladder and gripped the rungs tightly.
“There was talk of Kuruk being the last of the cycle, that the world was
destined for an age of strife, to be torn apart by outlaws and warlords. Until
Jianzhu labeled Yun as the next Avatar. But the way it happened had no
precedent. Tell me this—with the two of you as close as you are, has Yun
ever once told you the details?”
She shook her head. It was strange, now that Kelsang mentioned it.
“That’s because Jianzhu probably forbade him. The full story would
cast the shadow of illegitimacy on him.” The monk rubbed his eyes; it was
abhorrently dusty in here. “We were in Makapu, surveying the volcano.
We’d honestly given up on finding the Avatar, like so many others. On the
last day of our trip, we noticed a crowd growing in a corner of the town
square.
“They were gathered around a child with a Pai Sho board. Yun. He was
hustling tourists like us, and he’d made quite a bit of money at it too. To
give his opponents confidence, he was running the blind bag gambit. It’s
when your opponent plays normally, picking their tiles, but you dump yours
into a sack and mix them up randomly. Whatever you draw each turn is
what you have to play. An insurmountable disadvantage.”
Kyoshi could see it too easily. Yun’s silver tongue coaxing money out of
people’s wallets. A stream of banter and flashing smiles. He could probably
bankrupt someone and still leave them happy to have met him.
“What most people don’t know, and what Yun didn’t know, was that the
blind bag is supposed to be a scam,” Kelsang said. “You’re meant to rig the
tiles or the bag itself so you have a way to find the exact combinations you
need. But Yun wasn’t cheating. He was actually drawing randomly and
winning.”
“We might have passed it off as a kid enjoying a string of luck, but
Jianzhu noticed he was drawing and playing Kuruk’s favorite strategies,
turn by turn, down to the exact placement of the exact tile. Game after game
he was doing this. He displayed tricks and traps that Kuruk explicitly kept
secret from anyone but us.”
“It sounds like Kuruk took Pai Sho pretty seriously,” Kyoshi said.
Kelsang snorted and then sneezed, sending a little tornado spiraling
toward the skylight. “It was one of the few things he did. And he was
unequivocally one of the greatest players in history. Depending on what
rules you’re using, you have as many as sixty tiles. There are over two
hundred spots on the board where you can put them. To randomly draw and
then brilliantly execute a precise line of play that only Kuruk was mad
enough to win with in the annals of the game—the odds of it are
unfathomable.”
Kyoshi didn’t have a taste for Pai Sho, but she knew that masters often
talked about play styles being as individualistic and recognizable as a
signature. An identity contained within the board.
“After what Jianzhu went through with Xu Ping An and the Yellow
Necks, it was as if a mountain range had been lifted off his shoulders,”
Kelsang said. “Any doubts he might have had completely vanished when
we saw Yun earthbend. Granted, the kid can move rocks like no one else. If
we identified the Avatar solely through a precision-bending contest, he’d be
Kuruk’s reincarnation hands down.”
Kyoshi thought back to this morning and Yun’s incredible manipulation
of the earth. In her mind only the Avatar could have done that.
“I don’t get it,” she said. “All of this is proof. Yun is the Avatar. Why
would you tell me that I’m—that I’m—why would you do that to me!?”
Her anguish was absorbed, without an echo, by the masses of faded,
crumbling paper that surrounded them.
“Can we get out of here?” Kelsang said, his eyes red.
They walked in silence down the corridors of the mansion. Kelsang’s
presence justified taking the shortest route, where the visiting dignitaries
might see them. They passed works of calligraphy mounted on the walls
that were more precious than bricks of gold. Vases of translucent delicacy
held the day’s flowers cut from the garden.
Kyoshi felt like a thief as they passed the casually displayed treasures,
no better than an intruder who might slip past the guards and stuff each
priceless item into a gunnysack. Even the servants’ dormitory, plain and
poorly lit, seemed to whisper ingrate at her from its dark corners. Not all of
the staff were able to live on-site. And she knew that a bed lifted off the
floor and a wooden door that shut tight were better than what many other
servants around the Earth Kingdom got.
She and Kelsang squeezed inside her room. It was cramped, the two of
them being the same height, but as sizable people they had practice at
minimizing themselves. Her quarters were small but still technically more
space than she needed. Besides a few knickknacks from her street life, her
only two possessions upon moving into Jianzhu’s house were a heavy
locked trunk that she’d stowed in the corner, and on top, the leather-bound
journal that explained what was in it. Her inheritance from the days before
Yokoya.
“You still have those,” Kelsang said. “I know how valuable they are to
you. I remember tracking you down to the little nest you made around the
trunk underneath the blacksmith’s house. You hugged the book so tight to
your chest and wouldn’t let me read it. You looked ready to defend it to the
death.”
Her feelings about the items were more complicated than he understood.
Kyoshi had never opened the lock, having thrown the key into the ocean
one day in a fit of spite. And she’d nearly burned the journal several times
over.
Down the hall someone was moving about, making the pine floorboards
squeak, so they waited until the footsteps disappeared. Kelsang sat on the
bed, bowing the planks in the middle. Kyoshi leaned against her door and
braced her feet like an attacking army was trying to beat it down.
“So you think I’m the Avatar because of a stupid song I made up?” she
said. Somewhere between the study and her room she’d found enough
backbone to say it out loud.
“I think you might be the Avatar because you pulled from thin air the
exact lines of a poem Kuruk wrote a long time ago,” Kelsang said.
A poem. A poem wasn’t proof. Not like the cold hard impossibility of
what Yun did.
Kelsang could tell she needed a better explanation. “What I’m about to
tell you, you should keep to yourself,” he said.
“I’m listening.”
“It was about twenty years ago. Kuruk’s companions were still very
close, but without any real challenges, we drifted toward our separate lives.
Jianzhu started working on his family’s holdings. Hei-Ran started teaching
at the Royal Fire Academy and married Rangi’s father, Junsik, in the same
year. It was the happiest I’d ever seen her. As for me, that was when Abbot
Dorje was alive and I was still in his good graces, so I was being groomed
to take over the Southern Air Temple.”
Assigning a past to the venerable benders was a strange mix of
satisfying and unnervingly voyeuristic. She was spying on things she
shouldn’t be privy to. “What was Kuruk doing?”
“Being Kuruk. Traveling the world. Breaking hearts and taking names.
But one day he showed up on my doorstep out of the blue, trembling like a
schoolboy. He wanted me to read over a declaration of eternal love he’d
composed in a poem.”
Kelsang inhaled sharply through his nose. Kyoshi kept her room dust-
free and spotless. “This happened two months after Hei-Ran’s wedding and
three months before Jianzhu’s father got sick,” he said. “He used a more
formal meter than a sailor’s ditty, and he didn’t sing it, but its contents were
exactly what you produced in the spur of the moment.”
That only weakened the argument. “You seem to remember this in
overly specific detail,” Kyoshi said.
The monk furrowed his brow. “That’s because he was going to give the
poem to Hei-Ran.”
Oh no. She’d heard stories of the Water Avatar’s lack of propriety, but
that was going several levels too far. “What happened next?”
“I . . . meddled,” Kelsang said. Kyoshi couldn’t tell if he was regretful
or proud of his decision. “I berated Kuruk for his stupidity and selfishness,
for trying to ruin his friend’s happy relationship, and made him destroy the
confession while I watched. To this day I don’t know if I did the right thing.
Hei-Ran always did love Kuruk with some piece of her heart. Maybe
everything would have turned out better if they had run off with each
other.”
Kyoshi quickly did the math in her head—and, yes, if that had
happened, Rangi wouldn’t have been born. “You did the right thing,” she
said, with more ferocity than she intended to show.
“I’ll never find out. Not long after, Kuruk met Ummi. That tragedy
unfolded so fast that my memory of it starts to blur.”
She didn’t know who Ummi was, and she had no intention of asking.
Matters were complicated enough. And Kuruk . . . Kyoshi was no advanced
student of Avatar lore, but she was developing a pretty dim view of the
man.
“I wish I could be more certain,” Kelsang said. “But if there’s anything
the last two decades have taught me, it’s that life does not work out in
certain, guaranteed ways. I’m not supposed to talk about this, but Yun is
having problems firebending. I fear Jianzhu is becoming . . . more extreme.
He’s staked so much on creating his ideal replacement for Kuruk that
anytime he faces a setback, his response is to dig in and push harder.”
Kyoshi was more shaken by the revelation that Yun couldn’t firebend
than anything else she’d heard so far. The image he projected was of a boy
who could do the impossible. Yes, Yun was her friend, but she still had the
same faith in the Avatar as anyone else. Mastering fire should have been
easy for someone as clever and talented as he was.
Kelsang seemed to pick up on her fear. “Kyoshi, Yun still has the
strongest case for being the Avatar. That hasn’t changed.” He worried the
end of his beard. “But if the criteria we’ve lowered ourselves to are
‘improbable things that Kuruk once did,’ then we have to consider you as
well.”
The monk ruminated for a moment, fitting pieces together in his head.
“To be honest though, I don’t know if I’m entirely upset by this new
complication. You have Avatar-worthy merits that you won’t
acknowledge.”
Kyoshi scoffed. “Such as?”
He thought it over more before deciding on one. “Selfless humility.”
“That’s not true! I’m not any more—” She caught Kelsang about to
laugh at her and scowled.
He got up, and her bed boards groaned with relief. “I’m sorry,” he said.
“I might have been able to answer this question years ago, had I the chance
to meet your parents like I did with the other village children. More
information could have made the difference.”
Kyoshi scrunched her face and kicked her heel back against the trunk,
releasing the sudden burst of anger that ran through her. The wooden side
made a drumlike thud. “I’m sure they would have loved having a child as
valuable as the Avatar,” she snapped. “A once-in-a-generation prize.”
Kelsang smiled at her gently. “They would have been proud of their
daughter no matter what,” he said. “I know I am.”
Normally Kyoshi would have felt comforted by the acknowledgment
that she’d become as much of a fixture in Kelsang’s life as he had in hers.
But if he walked out her door and told Jianzhu what happened, it could tear
apart the little corner of the world the two of them had marked off for
themselves. Didn’t Kelsang see that? Wasn’t he worried?
“Can we keep this a secret?” Kyoshi said. “Just for a while, until I can
get my bearings? I don’t want to be rash. Maybe you’ll remember Kuruk’s
poem differently in the morning. Or Yun will firebend.” Anything.
Kelsang didn’t answer. He’d been suddenly transfixed by her tiny shelf.
It held a gold-dyed tassel, a few beads, a coin she’d pilfered from a
shrine donation box and felt too guilty to spend and too afraid to return. The
clay turtle she couldn’t remember exactly how she’d gotten, other than that
it was a present from him. He stared at the junk for a long time.
“Please,” Kyoshi said.
Kelsang looked back at her and sighed. “For a little while, perhaps,” he
said. “But eventually we have to tell Jianzhu and the others. Whatever the
truth is, we must find it together.”
After he left, Kyoshi didn’t sit down. She thought best on her feet,
motionless. Her wooden cell of a room was good enough for that.
This was a nightmare. While she wasn’t an important political dignitary,
she wasn’t an idiot either. She knew what kind of bedlam lay behind the
precarious balance Jianzhu and Yun had set up, the mountain they’d
suspended in the air.
From around corners she’d spied on the bouts of ecstatic sobbing, the
sense of utter relief that many of the visiting sages went through when they
first laid eyes on Yun. After more than a decade of doubt, he was a solid
body, a sharp mind, a belatedly fulfilled promise. The inheritor of blessed
Yangchen’s legacy. Avatar Yun was a beacon of light who gave people
confidence the world could be saved.
“Avatar Kyoshi” would simply be dirt kicked over the fire.
Her eyes landed on the journal lying on the trunk. Her pulse quickened
again. Would they have left her behind if they knew there was a chance, no
matter how slim, that she held some worth?
A knock came from outside. Gifting duty. She’d forgotten.
She shoved the entire conversation with Kelsang to the back of her
mind as she opened the door. She knew from experience there was no
trouble so great that she couldn’t pack it away. Kelsang wasn’t certain,
therefore she didn’t need to worry. What she needed to worry about was
Rangi having her hide for—
“Hey,” Yun said. “I was looking for you.”
