THE ICEBERG
Kyoshi’s nightmare smelled like wet bison.
It was raining, and bales of cargo wrapped in burlap splashed in the mud
around her as if they’d fallen from great heights, part of the storm. It no
longer mattered what was in them.
A flash of lightning revealed hooded figures looming over her. Their
faces were obscured by masks of running water.
I hate you, Kyoshi screamed. I’ll hate you until I die. I’ll never forgive
you.
Two hands clasped each other. A transaction was struck, one that would
be violated the instant it became an inconvenience to uphold. Something
wet and lifeless hit her in the shins, papers sealed in oilcloth.
“Kyoshi!”
She woke up with a start and nearly pitched over the side of Pengpeng’s
saddle. She caught herself on the rail, the sanded edge pressing into her gut,
and stared at the roiling blue beneath them. It was a long way down to the
ocean.
It wasn’t rain on her face but sweat. She saw a droplet fall off her chin
and plummet into nothingness before someone grabbed her by the shoulders
and yanked her back. She fell on top of Yun and Rangi both, squashing the
wind out of them.
“Don’t scare us like that!” Yun shouted in her ear.
“What happened?” Kelsang said, trying to shift around in the driver’s
seat without disturbing the reins. His legs straddled Pengpeng’s gigantic
neck, making it difficult for him to see behind himself.
“Nothing, Master Kelsang,” Rangi grumbled. “Kyoshi had a bad dream
is all.”
Kelsang looked skeptical but kept flying straight ahead. “Well okay
then, but be careful, and no roughhousing. We don’t want anyone getting
hurt before we get there. Jianzhu would have my head on a platter.”
He gave Kyoshi an extra glance of worry. He’d been caught off guard
by Yun’s sudden mission, and her agreeing to tag along had amplified the
strain. This treaty signing was too important to cast doubt on Yun’s
Avatarhood now. Until it was over, Kelsang would have to help her
shoulder the burden of their secret, their lie by omission.
Below them on the water’s surface, trailing only slightly behind, was
the ship bearing Yun’s earthbending master, as well as Hei-Ran and the
small contingent of armed guards. Aided by the occasional boost of wind
that Kelsang generated with a whirl of his arms, the grand junk kept pace
with Pengpeng, its battened sails billowing and full. Kelsang’s bison was
dry and well-groomed for the occasion, her white fur as fluffy as a cloud
underneath her fancier saddle, but the stiff salt breeze still carried a hint of
beastly odor.
That must have been what I smelled in my dream. It had been a very
long time since Kelsang had taken her for a ride, and the unfamiliar
environment rattled her sleeping mind. The titanic, six-legged animal
stretched its jaws wide and yawned as if to agree with her.
And speaking of dressing up, Jianzhu had given Kyoshi an outfit so far
beyond her station that she’d almost broken out in hives when she saw it.
She’d thought the pale green silk blouse and leggings would have been
enough finery, but then the wardrobe attendants brought in two different
pleated skirts, a shoulder-length wraparound jacket, and a wide sash with
such exquisite stitching that it should have been mounted on a wall rather
than tied around her waist.
The other servants had to help her into the clothing. She didn’t miss the
looks they shared behind her back. That Kyoshi had abused the master’s
favoritism—again.
But once the pieces were assembled, they melded to her body like she’d
been born to wear them. Each layer slid over the next with ease, granting
her full mobility. She didn’t ask anyone where the clothes that fit her so
well came from, not wanting to hear a snippy answer like Oh, Jianzhu
ripped them off the corpse of some fallen giant he defeated.
And the serious nature of the task ahead made itself clear as she finished
dressing. The inside of the jacket was lined with finely woven chainmail.
Not thick enough to stop a spearpoint with a person’s entire weight behind
it, but strong enough to absorb a dart or the slash of a hidden knife. The
weight of the metal links on her shoulders said to expect trouble.
“Why are the four of us up here and not down there?” Kyoshi said,
pointing at the boat, where more preparations were undoubtedly being
made.
“I insisted,” Yun said. “Sifu wasn’t happy about it, but I told him I
needed time by myself.”
“To go over the plan?”
Yun looked off into the distance. “Sure.”
He’d been acting strange recently. But then again, he was a new Avatar
about to enact a decree in one of the most hostile settings imaginable. Yun
might have had all the talent and the best teachers in the world, but he was
still diving into the abyss headlong.
“Your master has good reason for his reluctance,” Kelsang said to him.
“At one point it was somewhat of a tradition for the Avatar to travel
extensively with his or her friends, without the supervision of elders. But
Hei-Ran, Jianzhu, and I . . . the three of us weren’t the positive influences
on Kuruk that we were supposed to be. Jianzhu views that period of our
youth as a great personal failing of his.”
“Sounds like a failing of Kuruk’s instead,” Kyoshi muttered.
“Don’t criticize Yun’s past life,” Rangi said, whacking her shoulder with
a mittened hand. “The Avatars tread paths of great destiny. Every action
they take is meaningful.”
They meaningfully passed another three dull, meaningful hours in
southward flight. It got colder, much colder. They pulled on parkas and
bundled themselves in quilts as they swooped over otter penguins wriggling
atop ever-growing chunks of floating ice. The cry of antarctic birds could
be heard on the wind.
“We’re here,” Kelsang said. He was the only one who hadn’t put on
extra layers; it was theorized around the mansion that Airbenders were
simply immune to the weather. “Hold on for the descent.”
Their target was an iceberg almost as big as Yokoya itself. The blue crag
rose into the air as high as the hills of their earthbound village. A small flat
shelf ringed the formation, presumably giving them a place to set up camp.
Most of the far side was obscured by the peak, but as they flew lower
Kyoshi caught a glimpse of felt tents dotting the opposite shoreline. The
Fifth Nation delegation.
“I don’t see their fleet,” Rangi said.
“Part of the terms were that the negotiating grounds be even,” Yun said.
“For her that meant no warships. For us that meant no ground.”
The compromise didn’t feel even. The vast iceberg was one of many,
drifting in an ocean cold enough to kill in minutes. A dusting of fresh snow
gave every surface flat enough to stand on a coat of alien whiteness.
Kyoshi knew that though the Southern Water Tribe had long since
disowned Tagaka’s entire family tree, she still came from a line of
Waterbenders. If there was ever a location to challenge an Earth Avatar, it
was here.
Kelsang landed Pengpeng on the frozen beach and hopped down first.
Then he helped the others off the huge bison, generating a small bubble of
air to cushion their fall. The little gesture stirred unease in Kyoshi’s heart,
the playful bounce like cracking jokes before a funeral.
They watched Jianzhu’s ship come in. It was too large and deep-keeled
to run aground, and there wasn’t a natural harbor formation in the ice, so the
crew dropped anchor and lowered themselves into longboats, making the
final sliver of the journey in the smaller craft. One of them reached the
shore much faster than the others.
Jianzhu stepped out of the lead boat, surveying the landing site while
straightening his furs, his eyes narrowed and nostrils flared as if any
potential treachery might have a giveaway smell to it. Hei-Ran followed,
treating the water carefully, as she was decked out in her full panoply of
battle armor. The third person on the longboat was less familiar to Kyoshi.
“Sifu Amak,” Yun said, bowing to the man.
Master Amak was a strange, shadowy presence around the compound.
Ostensibly, he was a Waterbender from the north who was patiently waiting
his turn to teach the Avatar. But questions about his past produced
inconsistent answers. There was gossip around the staff that the lanky,
grim-faced Water Tribesman had spent the last ten years far from his home,
in the employ of a lesser prince in Ba Sing Se who’d suddenly gone from
eleventh in the line of succession to the fourth. Amak’s silent nature and the
web of scars running around his arms and neck seemed like a warning not
to inquire further.
And yet the Avatar had regular training sessions with him, though Yun
had told Kyoshi outright that he couldn’t waterbend yet and wasn’t
expected to. He would emerge from the practice grounds, bloodied and
mussed but with his smile blazing from new knowledge.
“He’s my favorite teacher other than Sifu,” Yun had said once. “He’s the
only one who cares more about function than form.”
There must have been strategy at work with Amak’s attendance. Instead
of the blue tunic he wore around the complex, they’d dressed him in a set of
wide-sleeved robes, dark green in Earth Kingdom style, and a conical hat
that shaded his face. His proud wolftail haircut had been shaved off, and
he’d taken out his bone piercings.
Amak took out a small medicine vial with a nozzle built into the top. He
tilted his head back and let the liquid contents drip directly into his eyes.
“Concentrated spidersnake extract,” Yun whispered to Kyoshi. “It’s a secret
formula and hideously expensive.”
Amak caught Kyoshi staring at him and spoke to her for the first time
ever.
“Other than Tagaka herself, there are to be no Waterbenders from either
side at this negotiation,” he said in a voice so high-pitched and musical it
nearly startled her out of her boots. “So . . .”
He pressed a gloved finger to his lips and winked at her. The iris of his
open eye shifted from pale blue to a halfway green the color of warmer
coastal waters.
Kyoshi tried to shake the fuzz out of her head. She didn’t belong here,
so far from the earth, with dangerous people who wore disguises like spirits
and treated life-and-death situations as games to be won. Crossing into the
world of the Avatar had been exciting back when she took her first steps
inside the mansion. Now the slightest wrong footing could destroy the fates
of hundreds, maybe thousands. After Yun told her last night about the mass
kidnappings along the coast, she hadn’t been able to sleep.
More boats full of armed men landed ashore. They lined up to the left
and right, spears at the ready, the tassels of their helmets waving in the
frigid breeze. The intent must have been to look strong and organized in
front of the pirate queen.
“She approaches,” Kelsang said.
Tagaka chose a relatively undramatic entrance, appearing on the edge of
the iceberg as a faraway dot flanked by two others. She plodded along a
path that ran around the icy slope like a mountain pass. She seemed to be in
no hurry.
“I guess everyone dying of old age would count as achieving peace,”
Yun muttered.
They had enough time to relax and then straighten back up once Tagaka
reached them. Kyoshi stilled her face as much as possible and laid the
corner of her eyes upon the Bloody Flail of the Eastern Sea.
Contrary to her reputation, the leader of the Fifth Nation was a
decidedly unremarkable middle-aged woman. Underneath her plain hide
clothing she had a laborer’s build, and her hair loops played up her partial
Water Tribe ancestry. Kyoshi looked for eyes burning with hatred or a cruel
sneer that promised unbound tortures, but Tagaka could have easily passed
for one of the disinterested southern traders who occasionally visited
Yokoya to unload fur scraps.
Except for her sword. Kyoshi had heard rumors about the green-
enameled jian strapped to Tagaka’s waist in a scabbard plated with burial-
quality jade. The sword had once belonged to the admiral of Ba Sing Se, a
position that was now unfilled and defunct because of her. After her
legendary duel with the last man to hold the job, she’d kept the blade. It was
less certain what she’d done with the body.
Tagaka glanced at the twenty soldiers standing behind them and then
spent much longer squinting at Kyoshi, up and down. Each pass of her gaze
was like a spray of cold water icing over Kyoshi’s bodily functions.
“I didn’t realize we were supposed to be bringing so much muscle,”
Tagaka said to Jianzhu. She looked behind her at the pair of bodyguards
carrying only bone clubs and then again at Kyoshi. “That girl is a walking
crow’s nest.”
Kyoshi could sense Jianzhu’s displeasure at the fact she’d drawn
attention. She knew he and Yun had fought over her presence. She wanted
to shrink into nothingness, hide from their adversary’s gaze, but that would
only make it worse. Instead she tried to borrow the face Rangi normally
used on the villagers. Cold, inscrutable disdain.
Her attempt at looking tough was met with mixed reactions. One of
Tagaka’s escorts, a man with a stick-thin mustache in the Earth Kingdom
style, frowned at her and shifted his feet. But the pirate queen herself
remained unmoved.
“Where are my manners,” she said, giving Yun a perfunctory bow. “It’s
my honor to greet the Avatar in the flesh.”
“Tagaka, Marquess of the Eastern Sea,” Yun said, using her self-styled
title, “congratulations on your victory over the remnants of the Fade-Red
Devils.”
She raised an eyebrow. “You knew of that business?”
“Yachey Hong and his crew were a bunch of sadistic murderers,” Yun
said smoothly. “They had neither your wisdom nor your . . . ambition. You
did the world a great service by wiping them out.”
“Ha!” She clapped once. “This one studies like Yangchen and flatters
like Kuruk. I look forward to our battle of wits tomorrow. Shall we head to
my camp? You must be hungry and tired.”
Tomorrow? Kyoshi thought. They weren’t going to wrap this up quickly
and leave? They were going to sleep here, vulnerable throughout the night?
Apparently, that had been the plan all along. “Your hospitality is much
appreciated,” Jianzhu said. “Come, everybody.”
It was a very, very awkward dinner.
Tagaka had set up a luxurious camp, the centerpiece a yurt as big as a
house. The interior was lined with hung rugs and tapestries of mismatching
colors that both kept the cold out and served as markers of how many
tradeships she’d plundered. Stone lamps filled with melted fat provided an
abundance of light.
Low tables and seat cushions were arranged in the manner of a grand
feast. Yun held the place of honor, with Tagaka across from him. She didn’t
mind the rest of their table being filled out by the Avatar’s inner circle.
Jianzhu’s uniformed guardsmen rotated in and out, trading sneers with the
pirate queen’s motley assortment of corsairs.
The Fifth Nation described themselves as an egalitarian outfit that
disregarded the boundaries between the elements. According to the
propaganda they sometimes left behind after a raid, no nation was superior,
and under the rule of their enlightened captain, any adventurer or bender
could join them in harmony, regardless of origin.
In reality, the most successful pirate fleet in the world was going to be
nearly all sailors from the Water Tribes. And the food reflected that. To
Kyoshi, most of the meal tasted like blood, the mineral saltiness too much
for her. She did what she could to be polite, and watched Yun eat in perfect
alignment with Water Tribe custom.
As Yun downed another tray of raw blubber with gusto, Tagaka
cheering him on, Kyoshi wanted to whisper in Rangi’s ear and ask if they
should be afraid of poison. Or the prospect of the dinner party stabbing
them in the back with their meat skewers. Anything that reflected the
hostilities that must have been bubbling under the surface. Why were they
being so friendly?
It became too much once they began setting up Pai Sho boards for
members of Tagaka’s crew who fancied themselves a match for the young
Avatar’s famous skills. Kyoshi nudged Rangi in the side and tilted her chin
at the merriment, widening her eyes for emphasis.
Rangi knew exactly what she was asking. While everyone’s attention
focused on Yun playing three opponents at once, she pointed with her toe at
two men and two women who had silently entered the tent after the party
had finished eating, to clean up the plates.
They were Earth Kingdom citizens. Instead of the pirates’ mismatched
riot of pilfered clothing, they wore plain peasant’s garb. And though they
weren’t chained or restrained, they carried out their duties in a hunched and
clumsy fashion. Like people fearing for their lives.
The stolen villagers. Yun and Rangi had undoubtedly spotted them
earlier. Kyoshi cursed herself for treating them as invisible when she knew
what it was like to move unnoticed among the people she served. The entire
time, Yun had been putting on a false smile while Tagaka paraded her true
spoils of war in front of him.
Rangi found her trembling hand and gave it a quick squeeze, sending a
pulse of reassuring warmth over her skin. Stay strong.
They watched Yun demolish his opponents in three different ways,
simultaneously. The first he blitzed down, the second he’d forced into a no-
win situation, and the third he’d lured into a trap so diabolical that the
hapless pirate thought he was winning the whole time until the last five
moves.
The audience roared when Yun finished his last victim off. Coins
clinked as wagers traded hands, and the challengers received slaps and jeers
from their comrades.
Tagaka laughed and threw back another shot of strong wine. “Tell me,
Avatar. Are you enjoying yourself?”
“I’ve been to many places around the world,” Yun said. “And your
hospitality has been unmatched.”
“I’m so glad,” she said, reaching for more drink. “I was convinced you
were planning to kill me before the night was through.”
The atmosphere of the gathering went from full speed to a dead stop.
Tagaka’s men seemed as surprised as Jianzhu’s. The mass stillness that ran
through the party nearly created its own sound. The tensing of neck
muscles. Hairs raising on end.
Kyoshi tried to glance at Master Amak without making it obvious. The
hardened Waterbender was sitting away from the main group, peering
soberly at Tagaka over the edge of his unused wine cup. The floor was
covered in skins and rugs, but underneath was a whole island of weaponry
at his disposal. Instead of freezing up like everyone else, Kyoshi could see
his shoulders relaxing, loosening, readying for a sudden surge of violence.
She thought Jianzhu might say something, take over for Yun now that
the theatrics were off course, but he did nothing. Jianzhu calmly watched
Yun stack the Pai Sho tiles between his fingers, as if the only thing he cared
about was making sure his student displayed good manners by cleaning up
after a finished game.
“Mistress Tagaka,” Yun said. “If this is about the size of my contingent,
I assure you I meant no harm or insult. The soldiers who came with me are
merely an honor guard. I didn’t want to bring them, but they were so
excited about the chance to witness you make history with the Avatar.”
“I’m not concerned about a bunch of flunkies with spears, boy,” Tagaka
said. Her voice had turned lower. The time for flattery was over. “I’m
talking about those three.”
She pointed, her fingers forming a trident. Not at Amak or any of the
armored Earth Kingdom soldiers, but at Jianzhu, Hei-Ran, and Kelsang.
“I’m afraid I don’t understand,” Yun said. “Surely you know of my
bending masters. The famed companions of Kuruk.”
“Yes, I know of them. And I know what it means when the Gravedigger
of Zhulu Pass darkens my tent in person.”
Now Yun was confused for real. His easy smile faded, and his head
tilted toward his shoulder. Kyoshi had heard of various battles and locations
associated with Jianzhu’s name, and Zhulu Pass was one of many, not a
standout in a long list. He was a great hero of the Earth Kingdom after all,
one of its leading sages.
“Are you referring to the story of how my esteemed mentor piously
interred the bodies of villagers he found cut down by rebels, giving them
their final rest and dignity?” Yun said. The game tiles clacked together in
his palm.
Tagaka shook her head. “I’m referring to five thousand Yellow Necks,
buried alive, the rest terrorized into submission. The entire uprising crushed
by one man. Your ‘esteemed mentor.’”
She turned to Jianzhu. “I’m curious. Do their spirits haunt you when
you sleep? Or did you plant them deep enough that the earth muffles their
screams?”
There was a hollow thunk as one of the game pieces slipped out of
Yun’s grasp and bounced off the board. He’d never heard of this. Kyoshi
had never heard of this.
Now that he was being addressed directly, Jianzhu deemed it proper to
speak up. “Respectfully, I fear that rumors from the Earth Kingdom interior
tend to grow wilder the closer they get to the South Pole. Many tales of my
past exploits are pure exaggerations by now.”
“Respectfully, I gained my position through knowing facts beyond what
you think a typical blue-eyed southern rustic should know,” Tagaka
snapped. “For example, I know who holds the Royal Academy record for
the most ‘accidental’ kills during Agni Kais, Madam Headmistress.”
If Hei-Ran was offended by the accusation, she didn’t show it. Instead
Rangi looked like she was going to leap on Tagaka and cook the woman’s
head off her shoulders. Kyoshi instinctively reached out to her and got her
hand swatted away for the trouble.
“And Master Kelsang,” Tagaka said. “Listen, young Avatar. Have you
ever wondered why my fleets stay cooped up in the Eastern Sea, where the
pickings are slim, engaged in costly battles for territory with other crews?
It’s solely because of that man right there.”
Of the three masters, only Kelsang looked afraid of what Tagaka might
reveal. Afraid and ashamed. Kyoshi already wanted to defend him from
whatever charges the pirate might levy. Kelsang was hers more than anyone
else’s.
“My father used to call him the Living Typhoon,” Tagaka said. “We
criminal types have a fondness for theatrical nicknames, but in this case, the
billing was correct. Grandad once took the family and a splinter fleet
westward, around the southern tip of the Earth Kingdom. The threat they
presented must have been great indeed, because Master Kelsang, then a
young man in the height of his power, rode out on his bison and summoned
a storm to turn them back.
“Sounds like a perfect solution to a naval threat without any bloodshed,
eh?” she said. “But have any of you pulled a shivered timber the size of a
jian from your thigh? Or been thrown into the sea and then tried to keep
your head above a thirty-foot wave?”
Tagaka drank in the Airbender’s discomfort and smiled. “I should thank
you, Master Kelsang. I lost several uncles on that expedition. You saved me
from a gruesome succession battle. But the fear of a repeat performance
kept the Fifth Nation and other crews bottled up in the Eastern Sea, my
father’s entire generation terrified of a single Air Nomad. They thought
Kelsang was watching them from the peaks of the Southern Air Temple.
Patrolling the skies above their heads.”
Kyoshi looked at Kelsang, who was hunched in agony. Were you? she
thought. Is that where you went between stays in Yokoya? You were hunting
pirates?
“A lesson from your airbending master,” Tagaka said to Yun. “The most
effective threat is only performed once. So you can imagine my distress
when I saw you bring this . . . this collection of butchers to our peace treaty
signing. I thought for certain it meant violence was in our future.”
Yun hummed, pretending to be lost in thought. The Pai Sho tile that
he’d fumbled was now flipping over his knuckles, back and forth across his
hand. He was in control again.
“Mistress Tagaka,” he said. “You have nothing to fear from my masters.
And if we’re giving credence to gruesome reputations, I believe I would
have equal cause for concern.”
“Yes,” Tagaka said, staring him down, her fingers lying on the hilt of
her sword. “You absolutely do.”
The mission hinged there, on the eye contact between Yun and the
undisputed lord of the Eastern Sea. Tagaka might have been looking at the
Avatar, but Kyoshi could only see her friend, young and vulnerable and
literally out of his element.
Whatever Tagaka was searching for inside Yun’s head, she found it. She
backed off and smiled.
“You know, it’s bad luck to undertake an important ceremony with
blood on your spirit,” she said. “I purified myself of my past crimes with
sweat and ice before you arrived, but with the stain of so much death still
hanging over your side, I suddenly feel the need to do it again before
tomorrow morning. You may stay here as long as you’d like.”
Tagaka snapped her fingers, and her men filed out of the tent, as
unquestioningly as if she’d bent them away. The Earth Kingdom captives
went last, ducking through the exit flaps without so much as a glance
behind them. The act seemed like a planned insult by Tagaka, designed to
say they’re more afraid of me than they’re hopeful of you.
Jianzhu swung his hands together. “You did well for—”
“Is it true?” Yun snapped.
Kyoshi had never heard Yun interrupt his master before, and from the
twinge in his brow, neither had Jianzhu. The earth sage sighed in a manner
that warned the others not to speak. This matter was between him and his
disciple. “Is what true?”
“Five thousand? You buried five thousand people alive?”
“That’s an overstatement made by a criminal.”
“Then what’s the truth?” Yun said. “It was only five hundred? One
hundred? What’s the number that makes it justified?”
Jianzhu laughed silently, a halting shift of his chest. “The truth? The
truth is that the Yellow Necks were scum of the lowest order who thought
they could plunder, murder, and destroy with impunity. They saw nothing,
no future beyond the points of their swords. They believed they could hurt
people with no repercussions.”
He slammed his finger down onto the center of the Pai Sho board.
“I visited consequences upon them,” Jianzhu said. “Because that’s what
justice is. Nothing but the proper consequences. I made it clear that
whatever horrors they inflicted would come back to haunt them, no more,
no less. And guess what? It worked. The remnants of the daofei that
escaped me dispersed into the countryside because at last they knew there
would be consequences if they continued down their outlaw path.”
Jianzhu glanced at the exit, in the direction Tagaka had gone. “Perhaps
the reason you’ve never heard about this from decent citizens of the Earth
Kingdom is because they see it the same way I do. A criminal like her
watches justice being done and bewails the lack of forgiveness,
conveniently forgetting about what they did in the first place to deserve
punishment.”
Yun looked like he had trouble breathing. Kyoshi wanted to go to his
side, but Jianzhu’s spell had frozen the air inside the tent, immobilizing her.
“Yun,” Kelsang said. “You don’t understand the times back then. We did
what we had to do, to save lives and maintain balance. We had to act
without an Avatar.”
Yun steadied himself. “How fortunate for you all,” he said, his voice a
hollow deadpan. “Now you can shift the burden of ending so many lives
onto me. I’ll try to follow the examples my teachers have set.”
“Enough!” Jianzhu roared. “You’ve allowed yourself to be rattled by the
baseless accusations of a pirate! The rest of you get out. I need to speak to
the Avatar, alone.”
Rangi stormed out the fastest. Hei-Ran watched her go. Maybe it was
because they used the same tight-lipped expression to hide their emotions,
but Kyoshi could tell she wanted to chase her daughter. Instead Hei-Ran
walked stiffly out the opposite side of the tent.
When Kyoshi looked back, Kelsang had vanished. Only the trailing
swish of an orange hem under a curtain betrayed which way he’d gone. She
gave a quick bow to Jianzhu and Yun, avoiding eye contact, and ran after
the Airbender.
She found Kelsang a dozen paces away, alone, sitting on a stool that had
presumably been abandoned by one of Tagaka’s guards. The legs had sunk
deep into the snow under his weight. He shivered, but not from the cold.
“You know, after Kuruk died, I thought my failure to set him on the
right path was my last and greatest mistake,” he said quietly to the icy
ground in front of his toes. “It turned out I wasn’t finished disgracing
myself.”
Kyoshi knew, in an academic sense, that Air Nomads held all life
sacred. They were utmost pacifists who considered no one their enemy, no
criminal beyond forgiveness and redemption. But surely exceptional
circumstances allowed for those convictions to be put on hold. Surely
Kelsang could be forgiven for saving entire towns along the coasts of the
western seas.
The strain in his voice said otherwise.
“I never told you how far I fell within the Southern Air Temple as a
result of that day.” Kelsang tried to force a smile through his pain, but it
slipped out of his control, turning into a fractured, tearful mess. “I violated
my beliefs as an Airbender. I let my teachers down. I let my entire people
down.”
Kyoshi was suddenly furious on his behalf, though she didn’t know at
whom. At the whole world, perhaps, for allowing its darkness to infect such
a good man and make him hate himself. She threw her arms around
Kelsang and hugged him as tightly as she could.
“You’ve never let me down,” she said in a gruff bark. “Do you hear me?
Never.”
Kelsang put up with her attempt to crush his shoulder blades through
the force of sheer affection and rocked slightly in her embrace, patting at
her clasped hands. Kyoshi only let go when the sound of a plate shattering
pierced the stillness of the night.
Their gazes snapped toward the crash. It had come from the tent. Yun
and Jianzhu were still inside.
Kelsang stood up, his own troubles forgotten. He looked worried. “Best
if you head back to camp,” he said to Kyoshi. The muffled sound of arguing
grew louder through the felt walls.
“Are they all right?”
“I’ll check. But please, go. Now.” Kelsang hurried to the tent and
ducked through the curtain. She could hear the commotion stop as soon as
he re-entered, but the silence was more ominous than the noise.
Kyoshi paused there, wondering what to do, before deciding she’d
better obey Kelsang. She didn’t want to overhear Yun and Jianzhu have it
out.
As she fled, the moonlight cast long, flickering shadows, making Kyoshi
feel like a puppeteer on a blank white stage. Her hurried exit took her too
far in the wrong direction, and she found herself among the outskirts of the
pirate camp, near the ice cliff.
She slammed against the frozen wall, trying to flatten herself out of
sight. Tagaka’s crew was in the midst of retiring for the night, kicking snow
over dying campfires and fastening their tents closed from the inside. They
had guardsmen posted at regular intervals looking in different directions.
Kyoshi had no idea how she’d come so close without being noticed.
She edged as quietly as she could back the way she came, around the
corner, and bumped into the missing sentry. He was one of the two pirates
who’d accompanied Tagaka to greet them. The man with the mustache. He
peered up at her face like he was trying to get the best view of her nostrils.
“Say,” he said, a rank cloud of alcohol fumes wafting out of his mouth.
“Do I know you?”
She shook her head and made to keep going, but he stuck his arm out,
blocking her path as he leaned against the ice.
“It’s just that you look very familiar,” he said with a leer.
Kyoshi shuddered. There was always a certain kind of man who thought
her particular dimensions made her a public good, an oddity they were free
to gawk at, prod, or worse. Often they assumed she should be grateful for
the attention. That they were special and powerful for giving it to her.
“I used to be a landlubber,” the man said, launching into a bout of
drunken self-absorption. “Did business with a group called the Flying . . .
Something Society. The Flying Something or others. The leader was a
woman who looked a lot like you. Pretty face, just like yours. Legs . . .
nearly as long. She could have been your sister. You ever been to
Chameleon Bay, sweet thing? Stay under Madam Qiji’s roof?”
The man pulled the cork from a gourd and took a few more swigs of
wine. “I had it bad for that girl,” he said, wiping his mouth on his sleeve.
“She had the most fascinating serpent tattoos going around her arms, but
she never let me see how far they went. What about you, honey tree? Got
any ink on your body that you want to show meeeaggh!”
Kyoshi picked him up by the neck with one hand and slammed him into
the cliffside.
His feet dangled off the ground. She squeezed until she saw his eyes
bulge in different directions.
“You are mistaken,” she said without raising her voice. “Do you hear
me? You are mistaken, and you have never seen me, or anyone else who
looks like me before. Tell me so.”
She let him have enough air to speak. “You crazy piece of—I’ll kill—
aaagh!”
Kyoshi pressed him harder into the wall. The ice cracked behind his
skull. “That’s not what I asked you.”
Her fingers stifled his cry, preventing him from alerting the others. “I
made a mistake!” he gasped. “I was wrong!”
She dropped him on the ground. The back of his coat snagged and tore
on the ice. He keeled over to his side, trying to force air back into his lungs.
Kyoshi watched him writhe at her feet. After thinking it over, she
yanked the gourd full of wine off his neck, snapping the string, and poured
the contents out until it was empty. The liquid splashed the man’s face, and
he flinched.
“I’m holding on to this in case you change your mind yet again,” she
said, waggling the empty container. “I’ve heard about Tagaka’s disciplinary
methods, and I don’t think she’d approve of drinking on guard duty.”
The man groaned and covered his head with his arms.
Kyoshi collapsed facedown outside her tent. Her forehead lay on the ice. It
felt good, cooling. The encounter had sapped her of energy, left her unable
to take the last few steps to her bunk. So close, and yet so far.
She didn’t know what had come over her. What she’d done was so
stupid it boggled the mind. If word got back to Jianzhu somehow . . .
A bright light appeared over her head. She twisted her neck upward to
see Rangi holding up a self-generated torch. A small flame danced above
her long fingers.
Rangi looked down at her and then at the liquor gourd still in her hand.
She sniffed the night air. “Kyoshi, have you been drinking?”
It seemed easier to lie. “Yes?”
With great difficulty, Rangi dragged her inside by the arms. It was
warmer in the tent, the difference between a winter’s night and an afternoon
in spring. Kyoshi could feel the stiffness leaving her limbs, her head losing
the ponderous echo it seemed to have before.
Rangi yanked pieces of the battle outfit off her like she was stripping
down a broken wagon. “You can’t sleep in that getup. Especially not the
armor.”
She’d taken her own gear off and was only wearing a thin cotton shift
that exposed her arms and legs. Her streamlined figure belied the solidness
of her muscles. Kyoshi caught herself gawking, having never seen her
friend out of uniform before. It was hard for her to comprehend that the
spiky bits weren’t a natural part of Rangi’s body.
“Shouldn’t you be sleeping with Yun?” Kyoshi said.
Rangi’s head turned so fast she almost snapped her own neck. “You
know what I mean,” Kyoshi said.
The redness faded from Rangi’s ears as quickly as it came. “The Avatar
and Master Jianzhu are reviewing strategy. Master Amak only ever sleeps
in ten-minute intervals throughout the day, so he and the most experienced
guardsmen will keep watch. The order is that everyone else should be well-
rested for tomorrow.”
They settled beneath their furs. Kyoshi already knew that she wouldn’t
be able to sleep as she’d been told. Her former life on the street in
conjunction with her privileged place in the mansion these days meant that,
improbably, she’d never had a roommate before. She was acutely aware of
Rangi’s little movements right next to her, the air rising in and out of the
Firebender’s chest.
“I don’t think they did anything wrong,” Kyoshi said as she stared at the
underside of their tent.
Rangi didn’t respond.
“I heard from Auntie Mui about what Xu and the Yellow Necks did to
unarmed men, women, and children. If half of that is true, then Jianzhu
went too easy on them. They deserved worse.”
The moonlight came through the seams of the tent, making stars out of
stitch holes.
She should have stopped there, but Kyoshi’s certainty buoyed her along
past the point where it was safe to venture. “And accidents are accidents,”
she said. “I’m sure your mother never meant to harm anyone.”
Two strong hands grabbed the lapels of her robe. Rangi yanked her over
onto her side so that they were facing each other.
“Kyoshi,” she said hoarsely, her eyes flaring with pain. “One of those
opponents was her cousin. A rival candidate for headmistress.”
Rangi gave her a hard, jostling shake. “Not a pirate, or an outlaw,” she
said. “Her cousin. The school cleared her honor, but the rumors followed
me at school for years. People whispering around corners that my mother
was—was an assassin.”
She spit the word out like it was the most vile curse imaginable. Given
Rangi’s profession as a bodyguard, it likely was. She buried her face into
Kyoshi’s chest, gripping her tightly, as if to scrub the memory away.
Kyoshi wanted to punch herself for being so careless. She cautiously
draped an arm over Rangi’s shoulder. The Firebender nestled under it and
relaxed, though she still made a series of sharp little inhalations through her
nose. Kyoshi didn’t know if that was her way of crying or calming herself
with a breathing exercise.
Rangi shifted, pressing closer to Kyoshi’s body, rubbing the soft
bouquet of her hair against Kyoshi’s lips. The startling contact felt like a
transgression, the mistake of a girl exhausted and drowsy. The more noble
Fire Nation families, like the one Rangi descended from, would never let
just anyone touch their hair like this.
The faint, flowery scent that filled Kyoshi’s lungs made her head swim
and her pulse quicken. Kyoshi kept still like it was her life’s calling,
unwilling to make any motion that might disturb her friend’s fitful slumber.
Eventually Rangi fell into a deep sleep, radiating warmth like a little
glowing coal in the hearth. Kyoshi realized that comforting her throughout
the night was both an honor and a torture she wouldn’t have traded for
anything in the world.
Kyoshi closed her eyes. She did her best to ignore the pain of her arm
losing circulation and her heart falling into a pile of ribbons.
They survived the night. There had been no sneak attack, no sudden chaos
outside the tent, as she’d feared.
Kyoshi couldn’t have slept more than an hour or two, but she’d never
felt more alert and on edge in her life. When they breakfasted in their own
camp at the base of the iceberg, she declined the overbrewed tea. Her teeth
were already knocking together as it was.
She looked for signs of trouble between Yun and Jianzhu, Rangi and
Hei-Ran, but couldn’t find any. She never understood how they managed to
wound each other and then forgive each other so quickly. Wrongs meant
something, even if they were inflicted by your family. Especially if it was
family.
Kelsang stayed close by her during the preparations. But his presence
only created more turbulence in her heart. Any minute now they were going
to walk up that hill and watch Yun sign a treaty backed by the power vested
in the Avatar.
It’s not me, Kyoshi thought to herself. Kelsang admitted there was
hardly a chance. A chance is not the same thing as the truth.
Jianzhu signaled it was time to go and spoke a few words, but Kyoshi
didn’t hear them.
He’s jumping to conclusions because Jianzhu sidelined him. He wants to
be a bigger part of the Avatar’s life. Any Avatar’s life. And I’m the closest
thing to a daughter he has.
She had to admit the line of reasoning was a little self-important of her.
But much less so than, say, being the Avatar. It made sense. Kelsang was
human, prone to mistakes. The thought comforted her all the way to the top
of the iceberg.
The peak came to a natural plateau large enough to hold the key
members of both delegations. For Yun’s side, that meant Jianzhu, Hei-Ran,
Kelsang, Rangi, Amak, and—despite the foolishness it implied—Kyoshi.
Tagaka again deigned to come with only a pair of escorts. The mustached
man was not part of her guard this time, thankfully. But one of the Earth
Kingdom hostages, a young woman who had the sunburned mien of a
fishwife, accompanied the pirates. She silently carried a baggage pack on
her shoulders and stared at the ground like her past and future were written
on it.
The two sides faced each other over the flat surface. They were high
enough up to overlook the smaller icebergs that drifted near their frozen
mountain.
“I figured we’d use the traditional setting for such matters,” Tagaka
said. “So please bear with me for a moment.”
The pirate queen wedged her feet in the snow and took a shouting
breath. Her arms moved fluidly in the form of waterbending, but nothing
happened.
“Hold on,” she said.
She tried again, waving her limbs with more speed and more strain. A
circle rose haltingly out of the ice, the size of a table. It was very slow
going.
Kyoshi thought she heard a scoff come from Master Amak, but it could
have been the creak of two smaller ice lumps sprouting on opposite sides of
the table. Tagaka struggled mightily until they were tall enough to sit on.
“You’ll have to forgive me,” she said, out of breath. “I’m not exactly the
bender my father and grandfather were.”
The Earth Kingdom woman opened her pack and quickly laid out a
cloth over the table and cushions on the seats. With quick, delicate motions,
she set up a slab inkstone, two brushes, and a tiny pitcher of water.
Kyoshi’s gut roiled as she watched the woman meticulously grind an
inkstick against the stone. She was using the Pianhai method, a ceremonial
calligraphy setup that took a great deal of formal training and commoners
normally never learned. Kyoshi only knew what it was from her proximity
to Yun. Did Tagaka beat the process into her? she thought. Or did she steal
her away from a literature school in one of the larger cities?
Once she had made enough ink, the woman stepped back without a
word. Tagaka and Yun sat down, each spreading a scroll across the ice table
that contained the written terms that had been agreed upon so far. They
spent an exhaustive amount of time checking that the copies matched, that
phrasing was polite enough. Both Yun and the pirate queen had an eye for
small details, and neither of them wanted to lose the first battle.
“I object to your description of yourself as the Waterborne Guardian of
the South Pole,” Yun said during one of the more heated exchanges.
“Why?” Tagaka said. “It’s true. My warships are a buffer. I’m the only
force keeping a hostile navy from sailing up to the shores of the Southern
Water Tribe.”
“The Southern Water Tribe hates you,” Yun said, rather bluntly.
“Yes, well, politics are complicated,” Tagaka said. “I’ll edit that to
‘Self-Appointed Guardian of the South Pole.’ I haven’t abandoned my
people, even if they’ve turned their backs on me.”
And on it went. After Tagaka’s guards had begun to yawn openly, they
leaned back from the scrolls. “Everything seems to be in order,” Yun said.
“If you don’t mind, I’d like to proceed straightaway to the next stage.
Verbal amendments.”
Tagaka smirked. “Ooh, the real fun stuff.”
“On the matter of the hostages from the southern coast of Zeizhou
Province as can be reasonably defined through proximity to Tu Zin, taken
from their homes sometime between the vernal equinox and the summer
solstice . . .” Yun said. He paused.
Kyoshi knew this was going to be hard on him. Rangi had explained the
basics of how people were typically ransomed. At best Yun could free half
of the captives by sacrificing the rest, letting Tagaka save face and retain
leverage. He had to think of their lives in clinical terms. A higher
percentage was better. His only goal. He would be a savior to some and
doom the rest.
“I want them back,” Yun said. “All of them.”
“Avatar!” Jianzhu snapped. The Earthbender was furious. This was
obviously not what they’d talked about beforehand.
Yun raised his hand, showing the back of it to his master. Kyoshi could
have sworn Yun was enjoying himself right now.
“I want every single man, woman, and child back,” Yun said. “If you’ve
sold them to other pirate crews, I want your dedicated assistance in finding
them. If any have died under your care, I want their remains so their
families can give them a proper burial. We can talk about the compensation
you’ll pay later.”
The masters, save for Kelsang, looked displeased. To them, these were
the actions of a petulant child who didn’t understand how the world
worked.
But Kyoshi had never loved her Avatar more. This was what Yun had
wanted her to see when he’d begged her to come along. Her friend, standing
up for what was right. Her heart was ready to burst.
Tagaka leaned back on her ice stool. “Sure.”
Yun blinked, his moment of glory and defiance yanked out from under
him prematurely. “You agree?”
“I agree,” Tagaka said. “You can have all of the captives back. They’re
free. Every single one.”
A sob rang out in the air. It was the Earth Kingdom woman. Her stoic
resolve broke, and she collapsed to her hands and knees, weeping loudly
and openly. Neither Tagaka nor her men reprimanded her.
Yun didn’t look at the woman, out of fear he might ruin her salvation
with the wrong move. He waited for Tagaka to make a demand in return. He
wasn’t going to raise the price on her behalf.
“The captives are useless to me anyway,” she said. She stared out to sea
at the smaller icebergs surrounding them. Despite her earlier patience, she
sounded incredibly bored all of a sudden. “Out of a thousand people or
more, not one was a passable carpenter. I should have known better. I
needed to go after people who live among tall trees, not driftwood.”
Yun frowned. “You want . . . carpenters?” he said cautiously.
She glanced at him, as if she were surprised he was still there. “Boy, let
me teach you a little fact about the pirate trade. Our power is measured in
ships. We need timber and craftsmen who know how to work it. Building a
proper navy is a generational effort. My peaceable cousins in the South Pole
have a few heirloom sailing cutters but otherwise have to make do with
seal-skin canoes. They’ll never create a large, long-range war fleet because
they simply don’t have the trees.”
Tagaka turned and loomed over the table. “So, yes,” she said, fixing him
with her gaze. “I want carpenters and trees and a port of my own to dock in
so I can increase the size of my forces. And I know just where to get those
things.”
“Yokoya!” Yun shouted, a realization and an alert to the others, in a
single word.
Tagaka raised her hand and made the slightest chopping motion with her
fingers. Kyoshi heard a wet crunch and a gurgle of surprise. She looked
around for the source of the strange noise.
It was Master Amak. He was bent backward over a stalagmite of ice, the
bloody tip sprouting from his chest like a hideous stalk of grain. He stared
at it, astonished, and slumped to the side.
“Come now,” Tagaka said. “You think I can’t recognize kinfolk under a
disguise?”
The moments seemed to slowly stack up on each other like a tower of raw
stones, each event in sequence piling higher and higher with no mortar to
hold them together. A structure that was unstable, dreadful, headed toward a
total and imminent collapse.
The sudden movement of Tagaka’s two escorts drew everyone’s
attention. But the two men only grabbed the Earth Kingdom woman by the
arms and jumped back down the slope the way they’d come, dodging the
blast of fire that Rangi managed to get off. They were the distraction.
Pairs of hands burst from the surface of the ice, clutching at the ankles
of everyone on Yun’s side. Waterbenders had been lying in wait below them
the whole time. Rangi, Jianzhu, and Hei-Ran were dragged under the ice
like they’d fallen through the crust of a frozen lake during the spring melt.
Kyoshi’s arms shot out, and she managed to arrest herself chest-high on
the surface. Her would-be captor hadn’t made her tunnel large enough.
Kelsang leaped into the air, avoiding the clutches of his underground
assailant with an Airbender’s reflexes, and deployed the wings of his glider-
staff.
Tagaka drew her jian and swung it on the downstroke at Yun’s neck. But
the Avatar didn’t flinch. Almost too fast for Kyoshi to see, he slammed his
fist into the only source of earth near them, the stone inkslab. It shattered
into fragments and reformed as a glove around his hand. He caught
Tagaka’s blade as it made contact with his skin.
Kyoshi stamped down hard with her boot and felt a sickening crunch.
Her foot stuck there as the bender whose face she’d broken refroze the
water, imprisoning her lower half. Above the ice, Kyoshi had the perfect
view of the Avatar and the pirate queen locked together in mortal knot.
They both looked happy that the charade was over. A trickle of Yun’s
blood dripped off the edge of the blade.
“Another thing you should know,” Tagaka said as she traded grins with
Yun, their muscles trembling with exertion. “I’m really not the Waterbender
my father was.”
With her free hand she made a series of motions so fluid and complex
that Kyoshi thought her fingers had telescoped to twice their length. A
series of earsplitting cracks echoed around them.
There was a roar of ice and snow rushing into the sea. The smaller
icebergs split and calved, revealing massive hollow spaces inside. As the
chunks of ice drifted apart at Tagaka’s command, the prows of Fifth Nation
warships began to poke out, like the beaks of monstrous birds hatching
from their eggshells.
Yun lost his balance at the sight and fell to the ground onto his back.
Tagaka quickly blanketed him in ice, taking care to cover his stone-gloved
hand. “What is this?” he yelled up at her.
She wiped his blood off her sword with the crook of her elbow and
resheathed it. “A backup plan? A head start on our way to Yokoya? A
chance to show off? I’ve been pretending to be a weak bender for so long, I
couldn’t resist being a little overdramatic.”
Waterbenders aboard the ships were already stilling the waves caused
by the ice avalanches and driving their vessels forward. Other crew
members scrambled among the masts like insects, unfurling sails. They
were pointed westward, toward home, where they would drive into fresh
territories of the Earth Kingdom like a knife into an unprotected belly.
“Stop the ships!” Yun screamed into the sky. “Not me! The ships!” That
was all he could get out before Tagaka covered his head completely in ice.
Kyoshi didn’t know whom he was talking to at first, thought that in his
desperation he was pleading with a spirit. But a low rush of air reminded
her that someone was still free. Kelsang pulled up on his glider and
beelined toward the flagship.
“Not today, monk,” Tagaka said. She lashed out with her arms, and a
spray of icicles no bigger than sewing needles shot toward Kelsang.
It was a fiendishly brilliant attack. The Airbender could have easily
dodged larger missiles, but Tagaka’s projectiles were an enveloping storm.
The delicate wings of his glider disintegrated, and he plunged toward the
sea.
There was no time to panic for Kelsang. Tagaka levitated the chunk of
ice Yun was buried in, threw it over the side of the iceberg toward her
camp, and leaped down after him.
Kyoshi grit her teeth and pushed on the ice as hard as she could. Her
shoulders strained against her robes, both threatening to tear. The ice
gripping her legs cracked and gave way, but not before shredding the parts
of her skin not covered by her skirts. She lifted herself free and stumbled
after Tagaka.
She was lucky Yun’s prison had carved out a smooth path. Without it,
she would have undoubtedly bashed her skull in, tumbling over the rough
protrusions of ice. Kyoshi managed to slide down to the pirate camp, her
wounds leaving a bloody trail on the slope behind her.
Tagaka’s men were busy loading their camp and themselves into
longboats. An elegant cutter, one of the Water Tribe heirlooms she’d
mentioned, waited for them off the coast of the iceberg. Only a few of the
other pirates noticed Kyoshi. They started to pick up weapons, but Tagaka
waved them off. Packing up was more of a priority than dealing with her.
“Give him back,” Kyoshi gasped.
Tagaka put a boot on the ice encasing Yun and leaned on her knee. “The
colossus speaks,” she said, smiling.
“Give him back. Now.” She meant to sound angry and desperate, but
instead she came across as pitiful and hopeless as she felt inside. She wasn’t
sure if Yun could breathe in there.
“Eh,” Tagaka said. “I saw what I needed to see in the boy’s eyes. He’s
worth more as a hostage than an Avatar, trust me.” She shoved Yun off to
the side with her foot, and the bile surged in Kyoshi’s throat at the
disrespectful gesture.
“But you, on the other hand,” Tagaka said. “You’re a puzzle. I know
you’re not a fighter right now, that much is obvious. But I like your
potential. I can’t decide whether I should kill you now, to be safe, or take
you with me.”
She took a step closer. “Kyoshi, was it? How would you like a taste of
true freedom? To go where you want and take what you’re owed? Trust me,
it’s a better life than whatever dirt-scratch existence you have on land.”
Kyoshi knew her answer. It was the same one she would have given as a
starving seven-year-old child.
“I would never become a daofei,” Kyoshi said, trying as hard as
possible to turn the word into a curse. “Pretending to be a leader and an
important person when you’re nothing but a murderous slaver. You’re the
lowest form of life I know.”
Tagaka frowned and drew her sword. The metal hissed against the
scabbard. She wanted Kyoshi to feel cold death sliding between her ribs,
instead of being snuffed out quickly by water.
Kyoshi stood her ground. “Give me the Avatar,” she repeated. “Or I will
put you down like the beast you are.”
Tagaka spread her arms wide, telling her to look around them at the
field of ice they were standing on. “With what, little girl from the Earth
Kingdom?” she asked. “With what?”
It was a good question. One that Kyoshi knew she couldn’t have
answered herself. But she was suddenly gripped with the overwhelming
sensation that right now, in her time of desperate need, her voice wouldn’t
be alone.
Her hands felt guided. She didn’t fully understand, nor was she
completely in control. But she trusted.
Kyoshi braced her stomach, filled her lungs, and slammed her feet into
the Crowding Bridge stance. Echoes of power rippled from her movement,
hundredfold iterations of herself stamping on the ice. She was somehow
both leading and being led by an army of benders.
A column of gray-stone seafloor exploded up from the surface of the
ocean. It caught the hull of Tagaka’s cutter and listed the ship to the side,
tearing wooden planks off the frame as easily as paper off a kite.
A wave of displaced water swept over the iceberg, knocking pirates off
their feet and smashing crates to splinters. Out of self-preservation, Tagaka
reflexively raised a waist-high wall of ice, damming and diverting the
surge. But the barrier protected Kyoshi as well, giving her time to attack
again. She leaped straight into the air and landed with her fists on the ice.
Farther out, the sea boiled. Screams came from the lead warships as
more crags of basalt rose in their path. The bowsprits of the vessels that
couldn’t turn in time snapped like twigs. The groan of timber shattering
against rock filled the air, as hideous as a chorus of wounded animals.
Kyoshi dropped to her knees, panting and heaving. She’d meant to keep
going, to bring the earth close enough to defend herself, but the effort had
immediately sapped her to the point where she could barely raise her head.
Tagaka turned around. Her face, so controlled over the past two days,
spasmed in every direction.
“What in the name of the spirits?” she whispered as she flipped her jian
over for a downward stab. The speed at which Tagaka moved to kill her
made it clear that she’d be fine living without an answer.
“Kyoshi! Stay low!”
Kyoshi instinctively obeyed Rangi’s voice and flattened herself out. She
heard and felt the scorch of a fire blast travel over her, knocking Tagaka
away.
With a mighty roar, Pengpeng strafed the iceberg, Rangi and Hei-Ran
blasting flame from the bison’s left and right, scattering the pirates as they
attempted to regroup. Jianzhu handled Pengpeng’s reins with the skill of an
Air Nomad, spinning her around for perfectly aimed tail shots of wind that
drove away clouds of arrows and thrown spears. Kyoshi had no idea how
they’d escaped the ice, but if any three people had the power and
resourcefulness to pull it off, it was them.
The fight wasn’t over. Some of Tagaka’s fleet had made it past Kyoshi’s
obstacles. And from the nearby sinking ships, a few Waterbenders declined
to panic like their fellows. They dove into the water instead, generating
high-speed waves that carried them toward Tagaka. Her elite guard, coming
to rescue her.
Rangi and Hei-Ran jumped down and barraged the pirate queen with
flame that she was forced to block with sheets of water. Rangi’s face was
covered in blood and her mother had only one good arm, but they fought in
perfect coordination, leaving Tagaka no gaps to mount an offense.
“We’ll handle the Waterbenders!” Hei-Ran shouted over her shoulder.
“Stop the ships!”
Jianzhu took a look at the stone monoliths that Kyoshi had raised from
the seafloor, and then at her. In the heat of battle, he chose to pause. He
stared hard at Kyoshi, almost as if he were doing sums in his head.
“Jianzhu!” Hei-Ran screamed.
He snapped out of his haze and took Pengpeng back up. They flew
toward the nearest formation of stone. Without warning, Jianzhu let go of
the reins and jumped off the bison in midair.
Kyoshi thought he’d gone mad. He proved her wrong.
She’d never seen Jianzhu earthbend before, had only heard Yun and the
staff describe his personal style as “different.” Unusual. More like a lion
dance at the New Year, Auntie Mui once said, fanning herself, with a
dreamy smile on her face. Stable below and wild on top.
He hadn’t been able to earthbend on the iceberg, but now Kyoshi had
provided him with all of his element that he needed. As Jianzhu fell, flat
panes of stone peeled off the crag and flew up to meet him. They arranged
themselves into a manic, architectural construction with broad daylight
showing through the triangular gaps, a steep ramp that he landed on without
losing his momentum.
He sprinted toward the escaping ships, in a direction he had no room to
go. But as he ran, his arms coiled and whipped around him like they had
minds of their own. He flicked his fists using minute twists of his waist, and
countless sheets of rock fastened themselves into a bridge under his feet.
Jianzhu never broke stride as he traveled on thin air, suspended by his on-
the-fly earthworks.
Fire blasts and waterspouts shot up from the benders manning the ships.
Jianzhu nimbly leaped and slid over them. The ones aimed at the stone
itself did surprisingly little damage, as the structure was composed of
chaotic, redundant braces.
He raced ahead of the lead ship, crossing its path with his bridge. Right
as Kyoshi thought he’d extended too far, that he’d run out of stone and
thinned his support beyond what it could hold, he leaped to safety, landing
on top of a nearby ice floe.
The precarious, unnatural assembly began to crumble without Jianzhu’s
bending to keep it up. First the individual pieces began to flake off. Chunks
of falling rock bombarded the lead ship from high above, sending the crew
members diving for cover as the wooden deck punctured like leather before
an awl.
But their suffering had only begun. The base of the bridge simply let
itself go, bringing the entire line of stone down across the prow. The ship’s
aft was levered out of the waterline, exposing the rudder and barnacled
keel.
The rest of the squadron didn’t have time to turn. One follower angled
away from the disaster. It managed to avoid crashing its hull, but the change
of direction caused the vessel to tilt sharply to the side. The tip of its rigging
caught on the wreckage, and then the ship was beheaded of its masts and
sails, the wooden pillars snapped off, a child’s toy breaking at its weakest
points.
The last remaining warship bringing up the rear might have made it out,
assuming some dazzling feat of heroic seamanship. Instead it wisely
decided to drop anchor and call it quits. If Tagaka’s power was in her fleet,
then the Avatar’s companions had destroyed it. Now they just had to live
long enough to claim their victory.
“You did good, kid,” said a man with a husky voice and an accent like
Master Amak’s. “They’ll be telling stories about this for a long time.”
Kyoshi spun around, afraid a pirate had gotten the drop on her, but there
was no one there. The motion made her dizzy. Too dizzy. She sank to her
knees, a drawn-out, lengthy process, and slumped onto the ice.
