THE FRACTURE
It was warm. So warm that when Kyoshi woke up in the mansion’s
infirmary, she thought it would be Rangi sitting in the chair by the bed. She
hoped it was.
Instead it was Jianzhu.
Kyoshi clutched her blankets tighter and then realized she was being
silly. Jianzhu was her boss and her benefactor. He’d given Kelsang the
money to take care of her. And while she’d never crossed the courteous
distance that lay between them, there was no reason to feel uncomfortable
around the earth sage.
That was what she told herself.
Her throat burned with thirst. Jianzhu had a gourd of water at the ready,
anticipating her need, and handed it over. She tried to gulp it as decorously
as she could but spilled some on her sheets, causing him to chuckle.
“I always had the hunch you were hiding something from me,” he said.
She nearly choked.
“I remember the day you and Kelsang told me about your problem with
earthbending,” Jianzhu said with a smile that stayed firmly on the lower
half of his face. “You said that you couldn’t manipulate small things. That
you could only move good-sized boulders of a regular shape. Like a person
whose fingers were too thick and clumsy to pick up a grain of sand.”
That was true. Most schools of earthbending didn’t know how to deal
with a weakness like Kyoshi’s. Students started out bending the smallest
pebbles, and as their strength and technique grew, they moved to bigger and
heavier chunks of earth.
Despite Kelsang’s protests, Kyoshi had long since decided that she
wouldn’t bother formally training in bending. It hadn’t seemed like a
problem worth solving at the time. Earthbending was mostly useless
indoors, especially so without precision.
“You didn’t tell me the reverse applied,” Jianzhu said. “That you could
move mountains. And you were separated from the ocean bed by two
hundred paces. Not even I can summon earth from across that distance. Or
across water.”
The empty gourd trembled as she put it on the bedside table. “I swear I
didn’t know,” Kyoshi said. “I didn’t think I could do what I did, but Yun
was in danger and I stopped thinking and I—where is Yun? Is he okay?
Where’s Kelsang?”
“You don’t need to worry about them.” He slumped forward in his chair
with his elbows on his knees, his fingers knotted together. His clothes
draped from his joints in a way that made him look thin and weary. He
stared at the floor in silence for an uncomfortably long time.
“The Earth Kingdom,” Jianzhu said. “It’s kind of a mess, don’t you
think?”
Kyoshi was more surprised by his tone than his random change of
subject. He’d never relaxed this much around her before. She didn’t
imagine he spoke this informally with Yun.
“I mean, look at us,” he said. “We have more than one king. Northern
and southern dialects are so different they’re starting to become separate
languages. Villagers in Yokoya wear as much blue as green, and the Si
Wong people barely share any customs with the rest of the continent.”
Kyoshi had heard Kelsang express admiration for the diversity of the
Earth Kingdom on several occasions. But perhaps he was speaking from the
perspective of a visitor. Jianzhu made the Earth Kingdom sound like
different pieces of flesh stitched together to close a wound.
“Did you know that the word for daofei doesn’t really exist in the other
nations?” he said. “Across the seas, they’re just called criminals. They have
petty goals, never reaching far beyond personal enrichment.
“But here in the Earth Kingdom, daofei find a level of success that goes
to their heads and makes them believe they’re a society apart, entitled to
their own codes and traditions. They can gain control over territory and get
a taste of what it’s like to rule. Some of them turn into spiritual fanatics,
believing that their looting and pillaging is in service of a higher cause.”
Jianzhu sighed. “It’s all because Ba Sing Se is not a truly effective
authority,” he said. “The Earth King’s power waxes and wanes. It never
reaches completely across the land as it should. Do you know what’s
holding the Earth Kingdom together right now, in its stead?”
She knew the answer but shook her head anyway.
“Me.” He didn’t sound proud to say it. “I am what’s keeping this giant,
ramshackle nation of ours from crumbling into dust. Because we’ve been
without an Avatar for so long, the duty has fallen on me. And because I
have no claim on leadership from noble blood, I have to do it solely by
creating ties of personal loyalty.”
He glanced up at her with sadness in his eyes. “Every local governor
and magistrate from here to the Northern Air Temple owes me. I give them
grain in times of famine; I help them gather the taxes that pay the police
salaries. I help them deal with rebels.
“My reach has to extend beyond the Earth Kingdom as well,” Jianzhu
said. “I know every bender who might accurately call themselves a teacher
of the elements in each of the Four Nations, and who their most promising
pupils are. I’ve funded bending schools, organized tournaments, and settled
disputes between styles before they ended in blood. Any master in the
world would answer my summons.”
She didn’t doubt it. He wasn’t a man given to boasting. More than once
around the house she’d heard the expression that Jianzhu’s word, his
friendship, was worth more than Beifong gold.
Another person might have swelled with happiness while looking back
over the power they wielded. Jianzhu simply sounded tired. “You wouldn’t
know any of this,” he said. “Other than the disaster on the iceberg, you’ve
never really been outside the shelter of Yokoya.”
Kyoshi swallowed the urge to tell him that wasn’t true, that she still
remembered the brief glimpses she’d seen of the greater world, long ago.
But that would have meant talking about her parents. Opening a different
box of vipers altogether. Just the notion of exposing that part of her to
Jianzhu caused her pulse to quicken.
He picked up on her distress and narrowed his eyes. “So you see,
Kyoshi,” he said. “Without personal loyalty, it all falls apart!”
He made a sudden bending motion toward the ceiling as if to bring it
crashing down onto their heads. Kyoshi flinched before remembering the
room was made of wood. A trickle of dust leaked through the roof beams
and lay suspended in the air, a cloud above them.
“Given what I’ve told you,” he said. “Is there anything you want to tell
me? About what you did on the ice?”
Was there anything she wanted to tell the man who had taken her in off
the street? That there was a chance he’d made a blunder that could destroy
everything he’d worked for, and that her very existence might spell untold
chaos for their nation?
No. She and Kelsang had to wait it out. Find evidence that she wasn’t
the Avatar, give Yun the time he needed to prove himself conclusively.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I truly wasn’t aware of my own limits. I just
panicked and lashed out as hard as I could. Rangi told me she often
firebends stronger when she’s angry; maybe it was like that.”
Jianzhu smiled again, the expression calcifying on his face. He clapped
his hands to his knees and pushed himself up to standing.
“You know,” he said. “I’ve fought daofei like Tagaka across the length
and breadth of this continent for so long that the one thing I’ve learned is
that they’re not the true problem. They’re a symptom of what happens when
people think they can defy the Avatar’s authority. When they think the
Avatar lacks legitimacy.”
He peered down at Kyoshi. “I’m glad there’s at least one more powerful
Earthbender who can fight on my side. Despite what I said earlier, I’m only
a stopgap measure. A substitute. The responsibility of keeping the Earth
Kingdom stable and in balance with the other nations rightfully belongs to
the Avatar.”
The unrelenting pressure of his statements became so great that Kyoshi
instinctively tried to shift the weight onto someone else. “It should have
been Kuruk dealing with the daofei,” she blurted out. “Shouldn’t it?”
Jianzhu nodded in agreement. “If Kuruk were alive today, he’d be at the
peak of his powers. I blame myself for his demise. His poor choices were
my fault.”
“How could that be?”
“Because the person who has the greatest responsibility to the world,
after the Avatar, is the person who influences the way the Avatar thinks. I
taught Kuruk earthbending, but I didn’t teach him wisdom. I believe the
world is still paying for my mistake in that regard.”
Jianzhu paused by the door as he left. “Yun is down the hall. Kelsang
across from him. You should rest more though. I would hate to see you not
well.”
Kyoshi waited until he was gone, enough time for him to exit the infirmary
completely. Then she burst out of bed. She pounded down the hallway,
rattling the planked floor, and after a frantic moment of hesitation, entered
the Avatar’s room first.
Yun sat in a chair next to a copper bathtub with his right sleeve rolled up
to his shoulder. His arm rested in the steaming water. Rangi stood behind
him, leaning on the windowsill, staring at the far corner.
“I keep telling the healers I don’t have frostbite,” Yun said. “This must
have scared them.” He raised his dripping hand. It was still stained with
black ink, giving it a pallid, necrotic look. Yun picked up a teapot of hot
water from the floor and poured it carefully into the bath to maintain the
temperature. He dunked his hand back under the surface and swirled it
around.
Kyoshi’s first instinct was to run over to them and embrace them
joyfully, to thank the spirits that they were alive. To see a bit of that
happiness reflected back in their eyes. The three of them had made it home,
safe, together.
But Yun and Rangi looked like their minds were still floating
somewhere in the Southern Ocean. Vacant and distracted.
“What happened?” Kyoshi asked. “Is everyone okay? Is Kelsang hurt
badly?”
Yun waved at her with his dry hand to be quiet. “Master Kelsang is
sleeping, so we should keep it down.”
As if she were the biggest detriment to Kelsang’s health right now.
“Fine,” she hissed. “Now will you tell me what happened?”
“We lost a lot of the guardsmen,” Yun said, his face shifting with pain.
“Tagaka’s hidden Waterbenders dropped an avalanche on them. Rangi and
Hei-Ran managed to save those they could by burning through the side of
the iceberg after it thinned.”
Rangi didn’t budge at the mention of her name. She refused to lift her
head, let alone speak.
“They freed me, and between us, we managed to knock Tagaka out,”
Yun went on. “Losing their ships and seeing their leader defeated was too
much for the rest of the Fifth Nation forces, and they fled. You should have
seen it. Pirates clinging to wreckage while Waterbenders propelled them
away. The loss of dignity probably hurt more than the falling rocks.”
“What happened to Tagaka?” Kyoshi asked.
“She’s in the brig of an Earth Kingdom caravan heading for the capital,
where she’ll be taken to the prisons at Lake Laogai,” he said. “I don’t know
what they’re going to do about the lake part of it if she can waterbend like
that, but I have to assume at least someone in the Earth King’s
administration has a plan. In the meantime, the Fifth Nation is no more.”
At her look of confusion, Yun gave her the exact same wan, forced
smile that his master did a few minutes ago. “Their ships have been
damaged beyond repair,” he explained. “Tagaka said it herself—her power
lies in her fleet. After what you did, it’ll be nearly impossible for her
successors to rebuild. They won’t pose a threat to the Earth Kingdom
anymore.”
Kyoshi supposed that was true. And that she should be happy to hear it.
But the victory rang hollow. “What about the captives?”
“Jianzhu caught one of her lieutenants and interrogated their location
out of him,” Yun said. “Hei-Ran pulled a few strings—well, maybe more
like the whole rope—and now the Fire Navy is mounting a rescue operation
in an act of goodwill. It’ll be the first time they’ve been allowed to fly
military colors in the Eastern Sea since the reign of the twenty-second Earth
King.”
He was giving her answers but nothing else. No emotion she could hook
her fingers around. Hadn’t he wanted her there as a confidant? Someone
who would be awed by his successes?
“Yun, you did it,” she said, hoping to remind him. “You saved them.”
In her desperation she borrowed a line from the imaginary voice that
had spoken to her on the ice. “People will talk about this for ages to come!”
she said. “Avatar Yun, who saved whole villages! Avatar Yun, who went toe
to toe with the Pirate Queen of the Southern Ocean! Avatar Yun—”
“Kyoshi, stop it!” Rangi cried out. “Just stop!”
“Stop what?” Kyoshi yelled, feeling nearly sick with frustration.
“Stop pretending like everything’s the same as it was!” Rangi said. “We
know what you and Kelsang were hiding from us!”
The floor spiraled away from Kyoshi’s feet. Her foundations turned to
liquid. She was grateful when Rangi marched up to her and planted an
accusing finger in her chest. It gave her a point to stabilize on.
“How could you keep that from us?” the Firebender shouted in her face.
“Was it funny to you? Making us look like fools? Knowing there’s a chance
that all of our lives are a gigantic lie?”
Kyoshi couldn’t think. She was enfeebled. “I didn’t . . . It wasn’t . . .”
Rangi’s finger began to heat up and smoke. “What was your angle, huh?
Were you trying to discredit Yun? Jianzhu, maybe? Do you have some kind
of twisted secret desire to see the world fall apart at the seams?”
The burn reached her skin. She didn’t pull away. Maybe she deserved to
be punched straight through, a red-hot hole in her chest.
“Answer me!” Rangi screamed. “Answer me, you—you—”
Kyoshi closed her eyes, squeezing out tears, and readied herself for the
blow.
It never came. Rangi stepped back, aghast, hands covering her mouth,
realizing what she was doing, and then barreled past Kyoshi out the door.
The room swayed back and forth, threatening to force Kyoshi down on
all fours. Yun stood up, navigating the thrashing floor with ease. He came
closer, his lips parting slightly. She thought he was going to whisper
something reassuring in her ear.
And then he sidestepped her. Slid right by, with a layer of empty space
between them as impenetrable as steel.
She had one more stop to make.
Kelsang was waiting for her, propped up to a sitting position in his bed.
There was a half-eaten bowl of seaweed soup on his bedside table, a
remedy for blood loss. His skin was paler than the bandages swaddling his
torso. Even the blue of his arrows seemed faded.
“We woke you up.” Kyoshi was surprised at how hard her voice was.
She should have been relieved to pieces that he wasn’t dead, and instead she
was on the verge of snarling at him. “You need to be resting.”
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I had to tell them.”
“Did you?”
“What I said about Yun having the greater chance of being the Avatar
isn’t true anymore. Not after what you accomplished on the iceberg.”
Kelsang ran his hand over his shaved head, feeling for the ghost of his hair.
“You were asleep for three days, Kyoshi. I thought your spirit had left your
body. There was no more pretending.”
Something delicate inside her snapped at hearing “pretend.” The people
closest to her were suddenly calling the years they’d spent together fake,
imaginary. A made-up prelude to a different, more important reality.
“You mean you couldn’t wait any longer to make your move,” she said,
unable to control her bile. “You wanted to teach an Avatar who depended
on you more than Jianzhu, and you lost your chance with Yun. That’s what I
am to you. A do-over.”
Kelsang looked away. He leaned back against his pillow.
“The time when any of us could have what we wanted passed years
ago,” he said.
