THE SPIRIT
“Master Kelsang needs more time to heal,” Jianzhu said over his shoulder.
“In the meanwhile, we can perform a spiritual exercise that might shed light
on our situation. Think of it as a little ‘Earthbenders-only’ outing.” He
adjusted Pengpeng’s course, the breeze blowing her tufts of fur in a new
direction.
The group was the unusual combination of Jianzhu, Yun, and Kyoshi.
They’d borrowed Kelsang’s bison, leaving Rangi and Hei-Ran behind.
There should have been nothing wrong with the concept of three Earth
Kingdom natives bonding over their shared nationality, but Kyoshi found it
unnerving. Without Rangi or her mother present, it felt like they were
sneaking away to do something illicit.
She glanced at the terrain below. By her best reckoning, they were
somewhere near the Xishaan Mountains that ran along the southeastern
edge of the continent, the same ones that the Earth King incorrectly
considered a sufficient barrier to waterborne threats like the pirates of the
Eastern Sea.
Kyoshi still wasn’t fully comfortable addressing Jianzhu in a casual
manner, so it fell on Yun to ask what the point of this trip was. “Sifu,” he
said cautiously, an idea forming in his head. “Is the reason we’re going to a
remote area because we’re trying to invoke the Avatar State?”
His master scoffed. “Don’t be ridiculous.”
“What’s the Avatar State?” Kyoshi whispered to Yun.
Jianzhu’s sharp ears intercepted her question. “It’s a tool,” he said. “And
a defense mechanism. A higher state of being designed to empower the
current Avatar with the skills and knowledge of all the past ones. It allows
for the summoning of vast cosmic energies and nearly impossible feats of
bending.”
That sounded definitive enough. Why wouldn’t they try it, after the
failures they’d suffered?
“But if the Avatar can’t maintain conscious control over so much power,
then their bending can go berserk, causing elemental destruction on a grand
scale,” Jianzhu continued. “They’d turn into a human natural disaster. The
first time Kuruk practiced entering the Avatar State, we went to a small,
uninhabited atoll so we wouldn’t hurt anyone.”
“What happened?” Yun said.
“Well, after his eyes stopped glowing and he came down from floating
twenty feet in the air inside a sphere of water, the island wasn’t there
anymore,” Jianzhu said. “The rest of us survived by the skin of our teeth.
So, no, we’re not triggering the Avatar State. I shudder to think what would
happen if an Earth Avatar started hurling landmasses left and right with
abandon.”
He took them lower. The westward side of the mountainous ridge was
dotted with empty mining settlements. Scapes of brown dust spread from
the operating sites like an infection, eating into the treeline and displacing
the natural vegetation. Kyoshi looked for signs that the land was growing
back, but the scars were permanent. The wild grasses kept a strict cordon
around the areas touched by the miners.
Jianzhu set Pengpeng down for a landing in the center of a mud-walled
hamlet. Whoever originally earthbent the structures into shape had been so
sloppy that it seemed intentional, as if to remind the occupants that they
weren’t going to stay long. Kyoshi was surprised they didn’t cause any
further collapses by jumping down from the bison.
“This is an important locus of Earthen spiritual energy,” Jianzhu said.
Yun dug his toe into the dust as he surveyed their surroundings. “It
looks more like a wasteland.”
“It’s both. We’re here to commune with a particular spirit roused from
its slumber by the devastation. I’m hoping one of you can help ease its
suffering.”
“But talking with spirits is no guarantee,” Yun said. “I’ve read of past
Avatars who’ve had trouble with it. And then there’s people like Master
Kelsang who have been able to communicate with the spirits effortlessly at
times.”
“I didn’t say the method was perfect,” Jianzhu snapped. “If it was, I’d
have used it on you long ago.”
Yun frowned and bit back more questions. Kyoshi was glad that he
shared her apprehension at the very least. The desolate town was eerie, the
bones of a once-living thing.
But on the other hand, she was slightly comforted by the knowledge that
it would all be over soon. She knew nothing about spirits. In her opinion,
being spiritual simply meant acknowledging the power of forces you
couldn’t see and coming to terms with the fact that you didn’t have control
over every aspect of your life. The rituals of food and incense placed at
sacred shrines were gestures to that worldview. Nothing more, nothing less.
The stories about strange translucent animals and talking plants might
have been true, but they weren’t for her. The Avatar was the bridge between
the human world and the Spirit World, and whatever test Jianzhu had in
mind would settle the matter. Yun would glow with energy or some other
final proof, and she would lie there inert, listening for sounds she couldn’t
hear.
After leaving Pengpeng with some dried oats to chew, they walked up
the slope of the mountain on a tiny path that ran alongside a gouged-out
sluice canal. It was steep going, and Yun remembered there was a faster
way to climb. “You know, I could make a lift and—”
“Don’t,” Jianzhu said.
Eventually, the incline revealed a large terrace carved into the mountain.
It was bigger than the entire settlement below, and it had been constructed
with more care. It was perfectly level, and empty postholes indicated it had
once held some very heavy equipment.
“Go sit in the middle,” Jianzhu told them.
Kyoshi felt the same prickle on the back of her neck as she did when
stepping onto the iceberg with Tagaka. It made little sense, seeing as how
she was surrounded by her native element.
“Come on,” Yun said to her. “Let’s get this over with.” He seemed to
have a better understanding of how this might escalate. She followed him to
the center of the terrace.
“It’s not the solstice, but it is almost twilight,” Jianzhu said. “The time
of day when spiritual activity is at its highest. I will guide you two in
meditation. Yun, help her if she needs it.”
Kyoshi had never meditated before. She didn’t know which leg you
folded over the other or how your hands were supposed to touch. Fists
pressed together or thumb and forefinger?
“You’ve . . . basically got it,” Yun said after they sat down. “Tuck your
tailbone in a bit more and don’t hunch your shoulders.” He stayed facing
her, taking up his own pose not too far off. She could have reached out and
poked him.
Jianzhu produced a small brazier and a stick of incense, which he placed
between them. “Someone help me light this with firebending?” he said.
They stared blankly at him.
“It was worth a shot,” Jianzhu said. He lit the incense with a precious
sulfur match and backed away until he reached the edge of the terrace,
positioned like the high mark of a sundial.
The air took on a sweet, medicinal note. “Both of you, close your eyes
and don’t open them,” Jianzhu said. “Let go of your energy. Let it spill from
you. We want to let the spirit get a taste of it, so to speak, so it knows it can
come forth.”
Kyoshi didn’t know how to control her energy. But if Jianzhu was
telling her to throw away the idea of containing herself, to stop minimizing
the space she took up, to let herself grow and rise to her full dimensions . . .
It felt wonderful.
The next exhalation she made seemed to go on forever, drawing from a
reservoir inside her that had no end. Her sense of balance ran wild, the pull
of the earth coming from each and every direction in turn. She swayed
within the stillness of her own body. Her eyelids were a theater of the blank.
A rasping noise came from the mountain. The sound of millstones with
no grain between them.
“Don’t open your eyes,” Jianzhu said softly. “Hear sounds, smell
smells; take note of them naturally and let them pass. Without opening your
eyes.”
The breeze picked up for a moment, dispersing the incense smoke. In
the time it took to settle back down, Kyoshi thought she detected a whiff of
something damp. Almost fungal. It wasn’t so atrocious as it was . . .
familiar.
Familiar to whom? she thought, giggling silently as the incense took
over again.
“You know what would be funny?” she said. “If it was . . . you know . . .
neither of us.”
“Kyoshi,” Yun said. His voice sounded slurred. “I need to tell you.
Something important. Me and you.”
She tried to speak again but her tongue was too big for it. Jianzhu hadn’t
told them to shut up yet. That was weird. Jianzhu was Master Shut Up. Was
he okay? She had to check if he was okay. It was her duty as a member of
his household. She disobeyed and peeked.
Yun was meditating peacefully. Had he spoken at all, or had she
imagined it? She tried to turn her head toward Jianzhu but went the wrong
way, looking at the mountain instead.
A hole had been opened in the rock, a tunnel of pitch-darkness. In its
depths, a great glowing eyeball stared back at her.
Her shriek caught in her throat. She tried to scramble away, but her muscles
failed her as if her joints had been sliced by a butcher. Nothing connected to
anything.
The eye floating in the mountain was the size of a wagon wheel. It had a
sickly, luminescent tinge of green. A web of pulsing veins gripped it tightly
from behind, giving the sphere an angry appearance, as if it would burst
under its own pressure at any moment.
It swiveled over to look at her, her futile struggle catching its attention.
Yun! her mind screamed. He wasn’t moving. His breathing was slow
and labored.
Jianzhu was unfazed by the horrific spirit before them. “Father
Glowworm,” he called out in greeting.
A cordial, mellifluent voice rumbled from deep within the mountain, the
echo concentrated by the walls of the tunnel. “Architect! It’s been so long.”
The eye darted between the three of them. “What have you brought me?”
“A question.”
The spirit sighed, a low, nauseating hum that Kyoshi felt in her bones.
“That chatty little upstart Koh. Now every human thinks they can march up
to the oldest and wisest of us and demand answers. I thought you had more
respect, Architect.”
Jianzhu stiffened. “This is an important question. One of these children
is the Avatar. I need you to tell me which one.”
The spirit laughed, and it felt like the earth bounced. “Oh my. The
physical world is in poor shape indeed. You do know I’ll need their blood?”
Kyoshi thrashed back and forth. But whatever Jianzhu had drugged
them with rendered her flailing into mere twitches of movement, her cries
into halting breaths. Yun’s eyes opened, but only by the smallest degree.
“I know,” Jianzhu said. “I’ve read Kuruk’s private journals. But you’ve
tangled with many of the Avatar’s past lives. I must have the unerring
judgment of a great and ancient spirit such as yourself.”
A carpet of slime spilled from the hole in the mountain, flowing over
the terrace. It was the same moldy, rotting green as the eye, and it reached
toward Yun and Kyoshi in tendrils, the shadows of fingers against a curtain.
There was a scraping noise against the stone floor. It came from pointed
flecks of debris floating in the wetness, bone-yellow roots and crowns.
The slime was full of human teeth.
Kyoshi was so scared that she wanted to die. Her heart, her lungs, her
stomach had been turned into instruments of torture, clawing and biting
against each other like frenzied animals. She wanted to reach the void. Pass
into oblivion. Anything to end this terror.
As the ooze reached for her knee, Yun opened his eyes. Summoning his
strength, he lunged at Kyoshi, shoving her away, throwing his body
between her and the spirit. He choked in surprise as the rasping slime shot
underneath his clothing. A damp crimson spot bloomed on the back of his
shirt.
Kyoshi’s foot lay next to the brazier of incense. A meager contribution
after what Yun did, but she screamed with her whole body this time, instead
of her vocal cords, and kicked at the little bronze vessel. The burning ash
landed on the slime and fizzled out. The plasm nearest them shrank from
the heat and the spirit hissed angrily.
Yun struggled to his knees beside her.
“I’m surprised you can move,” Jianzhu said to him, more impressed
than anything else.
“Poison training,” Yun spat through clenched jaws. “With Sifu Amak,
remember? Or did you forget every darker exercise you put me through?”
They were distracted from the slime regrouping, wrapping around
Kyoshi’s ankle, until it latched on tight and ground away, sanding her skin
off with the rows of teeth. Her blood formed clouds inside the living mucus.
Yun saw her writhe in pain. He grabbed her hand and tried to pull her
away from the spirit, their palms clasped hard enough that Kyoshi felt their
bones roll over each other. But the tendril held her fast, tasting her, lapping
at her wound.
“It’s this one,” the spirit said. “The girl. She’s the Avatar.”
Kyoshi and Yun were looking each other in the eye when it happened.
When she saw Yun’s spirit break inside him.
He had been lying to her with his body and his smile and his words this
whole time. He’d thought it was him. Truly and utterly. He’d never once
entertained the notion that it might not be him. Any kindness and warmth
he’d shown to Kyoshi since the iceberg hadn’t been signs of his acceptance
—they’d been layers of armor that he’d furiously assembled to protect
himself.
And that armor had failed. Piece by piece, Kyoshi saw the only Yun
she’d ever known, the boy who was the Avatar, slough and flake into
nothingness. His mantle had been stripped from his shoulders, and the
shape underneath was merely wind.
He let go of her.
Jianzhu was on top of them in a flash. He sliced at the branch of slime
with a sharp, precise little wall, and using the care of his own two hands,
dragged Kyoshi away to safety.
Just Kyoshi.
He laid her on the ground and turned around. But it was too late. The
spirit’s slime reared into the air between them and Yun, a snake guarding its
prey. The eyeball in the tunnel swelled with fury.
“You call me forth, ask for my boon, and then assault me?” Its roar
nearly shattered the bones in Kyoshi’s ears.
Yun, she tried to shout. Run. Fight. Save yourself. The Avatar—it never
meant anything.
Jianzhu took an earthbending stance, cautiously settling his feet the way
a swordsman might slowly go for his blade. “I couldn’t risk you taking your
revenge on Kuruk’s reincarnation. You had your blood, Father Glowworm.
Your price has been paid.”
“I’m raising it!”
Instead of attacking the two of them, the tendril wrapped around Yun
from neck to hip. His face was as pale as clay. He wouldn’t move his limbs.
Every fear Kyoshi had of taking from him what he treasured most had come
to pass in a thundering instant. There was only one more thing left for him
to lose.
No, Kyoshi sobbed. Please, no.
The spirit pulled, and Yun flew backward into the tunnel, disappearing
into the darkness. As Jianzhu punched his fist upward to seal the passage
shut once more with solid mountain, Kyoshi found her voice again.
She screamed pure fire.
The flame shot out of her mouth like the rage of a dragon, in a single
explosive burst. It doused the terrace and rendered swathes of lingering
ooze into blackened, flaking char. But the tunnel was closed. Her fire
washed impotently against the mountainside, until it petered out entirely.
Kyoshi stumbled to her feet, barely able to see past her sticky eyelids.
The inside of her mouth was blistered. She could sense Jianzhu’s presence
in front of her, looming.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “This could have been avoided if you had—”
She surged forward and tackled him off the edge of the terrace.
The trip down this time was worse than the iceberg. Kyoshi lost her grip
on Jianzhu the instant her shoulder smashed into a withered, hardened tree
root. She tumbled wildly, tail over tea-kettle, and came to a stop at the
bottom of the slope.
Ignoring the pain, she looked around for Jianzhu. He wasn’t to be found
in the thin scrub surrounding the base of the mountain. She snapped her
head upward at the sound of stone moving.
The earthbending master descended casually, stepping down a flight of
stairs that he created himself. Where a more orthodox bender would simply
raise a solid platform from the ground, Jianzhu gathered planks of stone and
assembled them at will beneath his feet, using the same technique he’d
reached Tagaka’s ships with. It looked like the earth itself was bowing to
him, prostrating under his immense power.
Kyoshi spotted a boulder behind him large enough for her to lift and
rooted her feet to the ground. She pulled it toward them, not caring that she
was also in its path.
Jianzhu didn’t bother turning his head. He reached behind him with one
arm and the room-sized rock split along its grain, letting him pass through
the gap. The two half spheres kept going and narrowly missed clipping
Kyoshi as well. She forced down a yelp as they collided with the ground
behind her.
Jianzhu looked at her with the same thoughtful expression he once
reserved for Yun. “I’ll have to teach you to do more than simply go big,” he
said.
Kyoshi tried the only other basic tactic she knew of, breaking the
opponent’s foundation. She aimed her intent at the base of his stairs. She’d
take them out along with a huge chunk of the slope.
But after rooting herself again and throwing the mother of all arrow
punches at the mountainside, the only movement she got was a geyser of
dust. The stairs barely trembled. She tried again. And again.
Jianzhu was taking deeper stances now, spiraling his arms in time with
hers, and suddenly she knew why. He was reading her. Smothering each
movement of earth she attempted. Nulling her out. She was a child pulling
on a door an adult was holding closed.
Jianzhu stopped right in front of her, his platform raising him up so that
he was eye level with her. Aside from the dust on his clothes, he could have
been leaving a meeting in his house. She’d been unable to touch him in the
slightest.
“Kyoshi,” he said with a warmth that made her sick to her stomach.
“You are the Avatar. Don’t you know what that means? The responsibility
that you now have?”
He ran a hand through his hair and bared his teeth like he regretted what
kind of bushes he’d planted in his garden. “Kyoshi, I’m not a fool, and
neither are you. We’re not going to pretend you’ll ever truly forgive me for
what happened here. What I’m asking you to do is weigh our loss against
the future of the world. Don’t let Yun’s sacrifice be in vain. Embrace your
duty and let me teach you.”
Yun’s sacrifice?
Our loss?
Her teeth crushed fresh wounds into her lips. She’d thought she’d
known hate before. Hate had been a hollowness inside her, the dull ache
that she’d been forced to cradle as she stumbled through the alleys of
Yokoya, dizzy with hunger and sickness. Hate had been reserved for her
own flesh and blood.
But now she understood. True hatred was knife-edged and certain. A
scale that begged for perfect balance. Yun lay on one side of the fulcrum.
Her only responsibility in this life, as far as she was concerned, was to even
the weight.
She swore to herself. One way or another, she was going to know what
Jianzhu looked like when he did lose everything he held dear.
Kyoshi hurled a Fire Fist, a move she knew nothing about. But
whatever firebending she had in her had been used up. It came out as a
normal punch, stopping short of his face.
Seeing her so desperate to harm him cracked his mask of serenity. He
frowned an ugly frown and clenched his fingers. Two small discs of stone
slammed into Kyoshi’s wrists from the left and right.
It happened so fast she didn’t have time to flinch. The stones shaped
themselves around her hands and joined each other in front of her body,
forming a set of thick shackles. They were as snug as a bone-doctor’s splint
and as unbreakable as iron.
The bands of rock rose into the air, taking her with them. Her shoulders
clicked painfully under her own weight, and she writhed like an insect
caught on sticky paper, madly kicking her feet without purchase.
Jianzhu held her like that, a carcass for inspection, before slamming her
back down. The stone shackles merged with the ground, and she struggled
on all fours. He’d forced her into a full kowtow, a student’s posture of
submission to their master.
“Had you the essentials of earthbending, you could free yourself,”
Jianzhu said. “You’ve gone neglected long enough, Kyoshi. You’re weak.”
Her palms sunk deeper into the ground the more she tried to resist.
There was no denying that he was right. She was weak, too weak to fight
him the way she needed to. The distance between them was simply too
great.
“So much wasted time,” Jianzhu said. “I could have taught you sooner,
if only I hadn’t been distracted by that little swindler.”
That he wasn’t done being cruel to Yun was a final kick to her gut. It
was incomprehensible. She couldn’t keep the tears from flowing down her
face. “How could you say that?” she screamed. “He worshipped you, and
you used him!”
“You think I used him?” Jianzhu’s voice grew dangerously quiet. “You
think I profited from him somehow? Let me give you your first lesson. The
same one I gave Yun.”
He stamped his foot, and a thick layer of soil clamped itself over
Kyoshi’s mouth, a muzzle with no holes for her to breathe. She began to
choke on her own element, her lungs clogging with grit.
Jianzhu swept his arm behind him in a wide, encompassing arc. “Out
there is an entire nation crammed full of corrupt, incompetent people who
will try to use the Avatar for their own purposes. Buffoons who call
themselves ‘sages’ when all it takes in the Earth Kingdom is having the
right connections and paying enough gold to plaster such a title on your
brow.”
The map of Kyoshi’s vision curled in on itself. Her toes gouged furrows
in the dirt, trying to push her body toward air. The pounding in her head
threatened to burst her skull.
“Without my influence, you’d turn into nothing more than a traveling
peddler of favors, flopping here and there with your decisions, squandering
your authority on petty boons and handouts,” Jianzhu said, unconcerned
that she was losing consciousness before his eyes. “You’d end up a living
party trick, a bender who can shoot water and breathe fire and spit useless
advice, a girl who paints the walls a pretty color while the house rots at its
foundations.”
She barely made out Jianzhu crouching down beside her, bringing his
lips close to her ear. “I have dedicated my life to making sure the next
Avatar won’t be used in such a manner,” he whispered. “And despite your
every attempt to fight me, I will dedicate my life to you, Kyoshi.”
He suddenly ripped away the earthen gag. The rush of air into her lungs
felt like knives. She collapsed onto her chest, her hands freed but useless.
For several minutes she lay there, despising each pathetic gulp she took,
each time she tried to stand but could not. Finally, she heaved herself to her
feet, only to see Jianzhu backing away from her, glancing over her head. A
gale of wind washed them in dust and desiccated leaves.
Kelsang landed his glider on the slope and slid down on his feet the rest
of the way. Relieved as she was to see him, Kyoshi knew right away that he
shouldn’t have come. His wounds had reopened, staining his bandages red.
He’d traveled too far on his own without his bison. The journey by glider
would have been arduous for an Airbender at full health.
“How did you find us?” Jianzhu said.
Kelsang closed the wings on his staff. They’d been repaired so hastily
that they wouldn’t fold completely into the wood, lumps of glue sticking
out of the seams. He leaned heavily on it for support, staring hard at Jianzhu
the whole time. “You left a map out on your desk.”
“I thought I locked my study.”
“You did.”
Jianzhu’s composure broke fully for the first time today. “Really, Kel?”
he shouted. “You think so little of me these days that you panicked when I
took the Avatar on a trip by myself and broke into my room? I can’t trust
the people closest to me anymore!?”
Kyoshi wanted to run to Kelsang, hide behind his robes, and sob like a
child. But fear had closed her throat and glued her feet. She felt like the
slightest word from her could prove to be a spark thrown on the oil.
She didn’t have to say anything though. Kelsang took one look at her
trembling form and grimaced. He stepped carefully between her and
Jianzhu, leveling his staff at his old friend.
It looked much more like a weapon than a crutch now. “No one in the
house could tell me where you went, Rangi and Hei-Ran included,” he said
to Jianzhu. “You’re saying I had no reason to be suspicious? Where’s Yun?”
“Kelsang,” Jianzhu said, thrusting his hands toward Kyoshi, trying to
get his friend to see the bigger picture. “That girl is the Avatar. I saw her
firebend with my own eyes! Your hunch was correct! After so many years,
we’ve found the Avatar!”
Kelsang hitched, his body processing the revelation. But if Jianzhu
thought he could distract the monk to his advantage, he was mistaken.
“Where is Yun?” he repeated.
“Dead,” Jianzhu said, giving up the ruse. “We tried to commune with a
spirit, but it went berserk. It took him. I’m sorry.”
“No!” Kyoshi shrieked. She couldn’t let that go. She couldn’t let him
twist what had happened. “You—you fed us to it! You threw Yun to that
spirit like meat to a wolf! You murdered him!”
“You’re right to be upset, Kyoshi,” Jianzhu said softly. “I got so carried
away with finding the Avatar that I lost my pupil. Yun’s death is my fault.
I’ll never forgive myself for this accident.”
He wasn’t wailing with sorrow. That would have been too obvious an
act. He kept the face that most people knew, the stoic, plain-speaking
teacher.
This was a game to him. With Kelsang as the piece in the center. Kyoshi
was gripped by a fresh bout of despair. If the monk believed his friend—the
adult, the man of good repute—over her, Jianzhu’s crime would be buried
along with Yun.
She needn’t have worried. “Kyoshi,” Kelsang said, never taking his
staff off Jianzhu. “Stay behind me.”
Jianzhu rolled his eyes, his ploy having failed.
“I don’t know what’s going on here,” Kelsang said. “But I’m taking
Kyoshi and we’re leaving.”
He staggered, still weak from his injuries. She caught him by the
shoulders and tried to keep him upright. The only way they could keep
stable was by holding on to each other.
“Look at the two of you,” Jianzhu said. “What you’re doing is you’re
coming home with me. Neither of you are in any shape to argue.”
Kelsang felt Kyoshi tremble through her hand on his back. Felt her fear.
He ignored his own pain and drew up to his full height.
“You will have nothing to do with Kyoshi for the remainder of your
life!” he said. “You are no longer fit to serve the Avatar!”
The cut landed deep on Jianzhu. “Where will you go?” he roared,
frenzied and frothing. “Where? The Air Temples? The abbots will hand her
back to me before you can finish telling your story! Have you forgotten
how far you’ve fallen in disgrace with them? Didn’t Tagaka jog your
memory?”
Kelsang tensed into a solid carving of himself. The grain of his staff
squeaked from how tightly he held it.
“I know everyone in the Four Nations who could possibly help you!”
Jianzhu said. “I put out the message, and every lawman, every sage, every
official will be tripping over their own feet to hunt you down on my behalf!
Being the Avatar will not protect her from me!”
“Kyoshi, run!” Kelsang shouted. He pushed her away and leaped at
Jianzhu, bringing his staff down to create a gale of wind. Jianzhu brought
earth up to meet him.
But they weren’t fighting the same fight. Kelsang meant to blast his
friend away, to knock the madness out of him, to overwhelm him with the
least amount of harm done, in the way of all Air Nomads.
Jianzhu shaved off a razor of flint no longer than an inch, sharp and thin
enough to pass through the wind without resistance and slice at where his
victim was exposed and vulnerable.
A spurt of blood came from the side of Kelsang’s neck, from a finger-length
cut so clean and precise it was almost elegant.
Jianzhu’s expression flickered with a sadness that was deeper and truer
than what he’d given to Yun, as he watched his friend fall.
Kelsang collapsed to the ground, his head bouncing lifelessly off the
hard-packed earth.
Those were the last things Kyoshi saw before the white glow behind her
eyes took over her entire being.
