THE INHERITANCE
One time, when she was ten or thereabouts, a traveling fireworks vendor
came to Yokoya. The village elders, in an unusual fit of decadence, paid
him to put on a show celebrating the end of the first harvest. Families
packed the square, gazing up at the booming, crackling explosions racing
across the night sky.
Kyoshi did not see the display. She lay on the floor of someone’s
toolshed, twisted by fever.
The morning after, the heat in her skull forced her awake at dawn. She
staggered around the outskirts of town, seeking cool air, and found the field
where the vendor set his explosives the night before. The ground was
scorched and pitted, utterly ravaged by a fiend born of no natural element. It
was covered in a layer of ash and upturned rocks. Water creeping in slow,
black rivulets. The wind smelling like rotten eggs and urine.
She remembered now being suddenly terrified that she’d catch blame
for the destruction. She’d run away, but not before scuffing her footprints
off the path she’d taken.
When Kyoshi regained her vision, she thought for a moment she’d been
thrown back in time to that unreal, violated landscape. The trees were gone
behind her, snapped at their trunks and torn by their roots to expose damp
clumps of soil. Before her, it was as if some great hand had tried to sweep
away the mountainside in a convulsion of fear and shame. Deep rips
crisscrossed the stone like claws. The hilltops had been pushed over, the
traces of landslides pouring down from their crests.
Kyoshi had the vague notion that she was too high up. And she couldn’t
see Kelsang anywhere. She’d wiped away his existence.
There was an animal howl floating on the wind, the scream of rosin on
warped strings. It came from her.
Kyoshi dropped to the ground and lay there, her face wet with tears. She
pressed her forehead to the earth, and her useless cries echoed back in her
face. Her fingers closed around the dust, sifting for what she’d lost.
It was her fault. It was all her fault. She’d pushed Kelsang away instead
of listening to him, allowed cowardice to rule her thoughts and actions. And
now the source of light in her life was gone.
She had nothing left. Not even the air in her lungs. The heaving sobs
coursing through her body wouldn’t allow her to breathe. She felt like she
was going to drown above water, a fate she would have accepted gladly. A
just punishment for an unwanted girl who’d squandered her second chance:
Kelsang, a miraculous, loving father conjured from thin air. And she’d
cursed him with death and ruin.
There was a tremor in the distance. The rubble around a certain spot
was sinking, parting. Someone had escaped the havoc she’d wreaked in the
Avatar State by burrowing deep down in the earth. Now he was tunneling
back to the surface, ready to claim his property.
Kyoshi scrambled to her feet in a blind, wild panic. She tried to run in
the direction they’d come, stumbling past landmarks she prayed she
remembered correctly. The baked ruins of the mining villages were so
similar in their crumbling appearance that, for a second, she thought she
was caught in a loop. But then, right as her legs were about to give out, she
found Pengpeng waiting where they’d left her.
The bison took a whiff of Kyoshi and bellowed mournfully, rearing on
her back four legs before crashing down hard enough to shake the dirt.
Kyoshi understood. Maybe Pengpeng had felt her spiritual connection with
Kelsang dissipate, or maybe Kyoshi simply smelled of his blood.
“He’s gone!” she cried. “He’s gone and he’s not coming back! We have
to leave, now!”
Pengpeng stopped thrashing, though she looked no less upset. She
allowed Kyoshi to climb on her back, using fistfuls of fur as a ladder, and
soared into the air in the direction of home, without being told.
Yokoya, Kyoshi corrected herself. Not home. Never again home. Yokoya.
She stayed back in the passengers’ saddle. She was unwilling to straddle
Pengpeng’s withers in Kelsang’s place, and the bison didn’t need guidance
for the return journey. From high up in the sky, she could see dark, rain-
filled clouds approaching over the ocean in the opposite direction. If they
flew fast enough, they could reach Yokoya before meeting the storm.
“Hurry, please!” she shouted, hoping Pengpeng could understand her
desperation. They’d managed to strand Jianzhu in the mountains, but the
man’s presence felt so close behind. As if all he needed to do was reach his
arm out for her to feel his hand clamping down on her shoulder.
That same year she’d caught sick and suffered through the fireworks,
Kelsang had returned to the village. He looked askance at the farmer who
swore that Kyoshi had been well taken care of with the money he’d left
behind. The weight she’d lost and her pallid skin told a different story.
Afterward, Kelsang promised Kyoshi that he’d never leave her for so long
again.
But Kyoshi had long forgotten about any nights she’d spent ill without
medicine. She’d been more concerned with the new kite-flying craze that
had taken hold of the village children. For weeks, brightly colored paper
diamonds and dragons and gull-wings had hypnotized her from the sky,
dancing on the wind. Not surprisingly, she hadn’t the supplies or guidance
to make one of her own.
Kelsang noticed her staring longingly at the kites dotting the sky while
they shared a meal outside. He whispered an idea in her ear.
Together, they scavenged and spliced enough rope for him to tie one end
around his waist. That afternoon, he took off soaring on his glider while
Kyoshi held the other end from below. They laughed so loud they could
hear each other across the great heights. For her, he was the biggest, fastest,
best kite in the whole world.
She’d misjudged the weather. The first drops of rain pattered on her cheek,
waking her from her slumber of exhaustion. She and Pengpeng still had
some ways to go when it quickly became a torrent that blotted out the sun.
They narrowly managed to get down to Yokoya in time to avoid the
lightning spreading its fingers across the sky.
They arrived at the mansion. Kyoshi jumped off Pengpeng near the
stables and landed ankle-deep in mud. She waded through the blinding rain
to the house. The staff and the guests had been driven inside to their
quarters.
The ride had given her time to think. And she’d concluded that every
decision from here on out was easy. An inevitability she would follow into
the darkness.
The only person who could have made her falter was waiting inside the
servants’ entrance for her, under the archway of the wall. Rangi looked like
she had confined herself to this area the entire day. She’d worn out a groove
in the floor with her pacing back and forth.
“Kyoshi, where were you?” Rangi said, a scowl on her face from having
been left in the dark for so long. “What happened? Where are the others?”
Kyoshi told her everything. About the powerful and terrible spirit that
had identified Kyoshi as the Avatar. About the way Jianzhu had offered Yun
up as a sacrifice and murdered Kelsang when he came to rescue them. She
even included how she’d entered the Avatar State.
Rangi stumbled backward until she knocked her head against a support
beam. “What?” she whispered. “That’s not—What!?”
“That’s what happened,” Kyoshi said. She dripped rainwater on the
floor, each plip another precious second lost. “I have to go. I can’t stay
here.”
Rangi started pacing again, running her fingers through the ends of her
hair, which had fallen loose. “There’s got to be a misunderstanding. An
explanation. You said there was a spirit? It must have played tricks on your
mind—that’s been known to happen. Or maybe you simply got confused.
Master Jianzhu can’t have . . . He wouldn’t . . .”
She watched Rangi attempt to will a different reality into existence. It
was the same trap Kyoshi had fallen into the day Kelsang told her she might
be the Avatar.
“We’ve got to get to the bottom of this,” Rangi said. “When Jianzhu
gets home, we’ll make him explain himself. We’ll find out what really
happened to Yun and Master Kelsang.”
“RANGI! THEY’RE DEAD! I HAVE TO GO!”
Throughout the journey back, Kyoshi had been thinking only about the
shards of her life buried on that mountain. She’d forgotten there was still
one more piece, and Rangi’s stunned silence let her know she’d lost that
too. Kyoshi pushed past her without saying goodbye and headed to her
room.
It was easy to fill a sack with her clothes. She barely had any. She was
going to leave everything on her shelf behind, but the thought of Kelsang
made her grab the clay turtle and throw that in. The item that gave her
pause was the beautiful green battle outfit that she’d worn on the iceberg
and was now hanging on her wall.
For some reason Jianzhu had let her keep it in her room. The thought of
taking, of using, a gift from him made her insides clench. But she would
need armor like that where she was going. A protective shell.
She took it down, hastily rolled it up, and stuffed it in the sack. The
leather journal went on top. She was truly grateful she’d never given in to
her urge to destroy the book. In the past it may have been incriminating
evidence, but now it was a war plan.
Tucking the bundle under one arm, she stooped down, grabbed the
handle of her trunk with the other, and dragged it out into the hallway.
The corners of the trunk screeched as they gouged out a trail in the polished
wooden floors. She supposed the reason that no one stopped her was that
they were scared. She saw the hems of robes disappearing around corners,
frightened whispers behind closed doors as she passed.
The guardsmen, she remembered, had been decimated on the iceberg.
And there had always been an undercurrent of suspicion in the way the
other servants looked at her. Now her aberrant behavior must have pushed it
over the edge into fear. She looked like a swamp ghost dripping with the
water she’d drowned in. She could only imagine what terrors her face held.
Each fork in the hallway brought another flash of raw, saw-bladed pain
to her heart as if she were one of the target dummies in the courtyard,
collecting jagged arrows with her body. The routes she’d taken in her daily
life unfolded down the corridors of the mansion, leading inevitably, over
and over again, to the dead.
The way to Yun’s room, the one area he never let her clean, flustering
over his privacy. The path to the little nook where Kelsang would meditate
when the weather was too harsh. The grass where the three of them had spat
watermelon seeds, only to run away when Auntie Mui yelled at them for
making a mess.
She would never tread these lines again. She would never arrive to see
Yun and Kelsang’s smiling faces at the end of her steps.
By design, Kyoshi took the long way past the wood-chopping station.
The splitting maul was there, the wedge buried in the block. Kyoshi placed
her bag between her teeth and picked up the maul with her free hand. The
entire block came with it, stuck to the blade, so she smashed the whole
agglomeration against the wall until the heavy tool was freed from the
wood.
She kept walking.
Outside, the rain had doubled. The interval between lightning and thunder
was nonexistent. She dropped her bag and flung the heavy wooden trunk in
front of her. It slid in the mud before coming to a stop.
The chest had been a focal point for her anger in the past, collecting the
flows of her hatred like the water barrels positioned under the gutters of the
house. It had been left behind in Yokoya, like her, by the people who’d
relegated her to the life of a starving, desperate, unloved creature for so
many years before Kelsang came into her life.
Her parents would have to take a lower place on the shelf for now. She
had someone new to focus on.
Another lightning flash illuminated which side the iron lock was on.
Raising the maul high above her head with both hands, she swung it down,
aiming for the weakest point.
The wedge of the maul bounced off the metal. The trunk sank deeper
into the mud. She struck it again. And again and again.
The thunder and rain drowned out her senses, leaving her with nothing
but the painful vibrations rebounding up the haft of the maul into her hands.
She struck again and felt a crunch.
Rather than the lock breaking, the trunk had splintered where the metal
was fastened to the wood. But it was open. Kyoshi tossed the maul aside
and raised the creaking lid.
Inside were two ornate metal war fans the color of gold alloyed with
bronze. The weapons were packed in a softer wood frame that held them
open while protecting them from rough treatment like the sort she’d just
doled out.
A headdress made out of the same material rested in between them. It
complemented the fans by mounting smaller versions of them on a band,
forming a semicircular crest at the forehead.
Lastly, there was a plain leather pouch with a case that she knew
contained makeup. A lot of makeup.
She snatched each item from its moorings. The headdress and fans were
much sturdier than they appeared—they were meant to be worn and
wielded in combat, after all. They and the pouch went inside her bag. The
trunk served no further purpose and would be left in the mud.
With that, Kyoshi was finished. She was taken aback at how completely
and utterly finished she was. How little she had put on display how much
she’d lost, like the black night sky around the burst of a firework. She’d
held on too hard to a treasure that might have been shaped like a home and
a family, only to discover that her touch had dissolved it entirely. She wiped
her eyes with her forearm and ran around the edge of the mansion, slipping
and falling in the rain at least twice, and reached the stables.
There was a shock waiting for her.
Rangi was busy securing bedrolls, tents, and other bales of supplies to
Pengpeng’s saddle. She looked up at Kyoshi from under the hood of her
raincloak.
“Let me guess,” she shouted over the downpour, pointing at several
waterproof baskets and sacks of grain. “You didn’t pack any food, did
you?”
She reached down, grasped Kyoshi’s hand, and pulled her onto
Pengpeng’s back. Then she hopped into the driver’s seat and took up the
reins. “We’ll have to fly low and head southwest, out of the storm.”
Kyoshi’s throat was a solid lump. “Why are you doing this?”
“I have no idea what’s going on right now,” Rangi said over her
shoulder. She flicked rain off her brow. Her face underneath looked like she
was heading into combat. “But I’m not going to let you ride off on your
own and die in this storm. You won’t last an hour without help.”
Kyoshi nodded, stricken dumb with gratitude to Rangi. For Rangi. She
pleaded with the spirits that it wasn’t a final cruel trick, the form of her
friend sitting before her. She maintained a safe distance so as not to dispel
the precious vision.
The Firebender snapped Pengpeng’s reins with authority. “Up, girl!”
Rangi shouted. “Yip yip!”
