ESCAPE
The sound of marching boots hitting the road filled the air. “You stupid old
man!” Lek shouted. “I’m never putting you on watch again!”
“Finally,” Lao Ge said. He winked at Kyoshi.
Officers wearing constabulary green hustled into the teahouse. They
fanned out along the sides to accommodate their numbers, reaching to the
corners. Twenty or so, wearing quilted armor with single dao broadswords
on their backs.
At the head of their formation, still in plainclothes but now wearing the
same headband adorned with the prefectural badge of the law as the others,
were the same three men who’d been in the teahouse earlier.
“Remind me again who’s good at spotting undercovers, Lek?” Kirima
snarled.
In a moment of panic Kyoshi thought the officers had come for her on
behalf of Jianzhu, but that couldn’t have been the case. If he’d sent out
messengers immediately, they still wouldn’t have beaten a bison.
No, she thought with a grimace. They were here for the girl who’d
walked into an outlaw hideout and started making demands with outlaw
codes. She’d incriminated herself in public, like a fool.
“In the name of Governor Deng, you are under arrest!” the captain said.
Instead of a sword, he pointed a ceremonial truncheon topped with the
Earth King’s seal at them, but it looked heavy enough to break bones
regardless. “Put down your weapons!”
Deng. The name brought more terror to Kyoshi’s heart than a charging
saber-tooth moose lion. Stout, red-nosed Governor Deng was a frequent
visitor to Jianzhu’s house and one of his closest allies. Kyoshi glanced at
Rangi. The Firebender’s worried headshake confirmed her fear. If they got
caught here, tonight, the whole operation was over. They’d be back in
Jianzhu’s grasp before his breakfast got cold.
The captain did not like the eye contact between her and Rangi. “I said
put down your weapons!” he shouted, bristling for a fight.
The daofei looked at their empty hands in confusion. Kyoshi realized
that unless the man felt particularly threatened by Lao Ge’s bottles, the only
armed one was she. The glinting war fan was still in her hand, its mate
stuck in her belt. She stood up so that she could have room to yank the other
fan out.
The captain took a step back in astonishment. He’d interpreted her
unfurling to her full height as a hostile act. He wasn’t the first. “Take
them!” he shouted to his men.
There were so many of them. Crammed in the dark confines of the
teahouse, the police force seemed larger in number than Tagaka’s
marauders. Five of the officers made a beeline for Kyoshi, the obvious
target.
They were knocked down by a blast of fire. Kyoshi glanced back at
Rangi again. She had her fist extended, her skin smoking. Her face was
upset but unrepentant. If they were in, they were in full-measure. Rangi
didn’t do things by halves.
Inspired by her decisiveness, Wong picked up Lao Ge and threw the
drunkard bodily at the captain like a rag doll. Lao Ge’s warlike screech as
he flew through the air was the only sign that he’d agreed to the act. The
two of them must have done it before. The element of surprise worked
strongly in their favor as Lao Ge’s wiry arms wrapped around the captain’s
neck and his legs scissored around the waist of his subordinate, becoming a
human net.
Another blast from Rangi sizzled past Kyoshi’s ear. She no longer knew
what was going on. Men closed in on her with swords drawn. She picked up
the nearest, heaviest object, the Pai Sho board, by one of its legs and swung
it in an arc.
The policemen were bowled over like wheatstalks by the dense wooden
bludgeon. The ones who tried to block her wild strikes with their dao had
their swords bent and crushed against their torsos for their trouble.
Fresh officers ran in through the door only to slip on a sheet of ice that
Kirima laid down using nothing but the remaining wine from Lao Ge’s
stash. Kyoshi jolted in surprise at the reserved, minimalist twirl of her
wrists and fingers. For a moment it looked like Tagaka of the Fifth Nation
was fighting on her side.
“Girl!” Lao Ge said, clamping swords inside their scabbards wherever
his bony fingers and toes could reach. “Bump the table!”
She didn’t have the same previous working relationship with him as
Wong, but Kyoshi caught his drift. She raised her foot high and stomped the
floor.
The teahouse jumped into the air again, this time tilted higher from the
back. Lao Ge and several of the policemen fell through the door. The others
were knocked prone, scrambling on the straw and frozen wine.
Kyoshi’s new compatriots managed to stay upright, having seen the
trick before. “Out the other side!” Lek yelled.
“What about Lao Ge?” She hadn’t meant to dump him into the thick of
the enemy.
“He can handle himself! Move!”
She flung the Pai Sho board at the nearest officers and followed the
others through the kitchen. It was empty, just a little room with a clay stove
that smoldered from the one attempt Lek had made at tea. Another door
gave way, and they were in the town square behind the building.
The passage had been disguised, painted over without a frame, and there
were no windows, so it was the side of the house that was least well-
guarded by the police. Only two men held positions there. Kyoshi heard a
zzip-zzip noise, and they crumpled to the ground before they could wave
their swords.
Lek tucked something back into his pocket. “Where’s your ride?”
Rangi answered, which was good because Kyoshi had lost her bearings
and had no idea. “Southwest corner of town,” she said. “If everyone follows
me, I can get us there.”
There was a harsh scrape of clay from above. A whole section of roof
tiles sloughed off and came crashing down at their heels as they ran.
Reaching Pengpeng meant running along the edge of the square, seeking
one outlet from the many cramped alleyways branching and forking in
different directions like the veins of a leaf.
Kyoshi caught sight of the reason why they hadn’t been swarmed by
more lawmen. Lao Ge was tangling with a whole platoon of them by the
main entrance. They slashed wildly at the air he occupied only to come up
empty every time. He folded and rolled his body like the wine still fogged
his mind, dodging and flipping, his movements seemingly designed to taunt
and frustrate them. Kyoshi saw him leaning over at impossible angles
nearly parallel to the ground and realized he was subtly earthbending
supports underneath his torso, changing his center of gravity to confound
his opponents.
“We can’t leave him!” she shouted to the others.
Apparently they could, because no one else gave Lao Ge a second
thought. “This one!” Rangi said, darting down a passage into the darkness.
But before anyone had a chance to follow, a thick stone wall shot up from
the ground, reaching the height of the neighboring roofs, closing the exit
off. The police force had brought Earthbenders of their own.
Lek kept running after her as if he were oblivious to the obstacle in his
path. Kyoshi though he was going to dash his brains out against the wall.
And then he did one of the most amazing things she had ever seen.
He stepped up into the thin air.
Lek ran higher and higher on invisible stairs. It was only after he’d gone
above eye-level that she saw how. The thinnest columns of earth she’d seen
anyone earthbend shot up from the ground with each of his steps,
anticipating where his foot would land next. They provided a moment’s
support and then crumbled into dust immediately once his weight shifted
off them. His rising path left no trace behind him.
Kyoshi had watched children around the village play by bending the
ground they stood on into the air. It was sometimes a test of courage, who
could make their pillar the highest, or a game of coordination, taking turns
with a partner to see-saw back and forth. But it was always highly
destructive to the ground, leaving jagged markers of what had happened.
And the players had to remain still, or they’d fall off their platforms.
Lek had none of those concerns. He floated, weightless, free of the
earth’s pull. He stepped over the top of the wall and onto a rooftop before
disappearing.
The feat wasn’t limited to Earthbenders. Kirima uncorked a small pouch
at her waist and wisps of water spilled forth, gathering under her feet. She
stepped higher into nothingness much as Lek had, only her stairs were
powerful, thin little jets that provided the same resistance as earth. If the
timing was more difficult for her, or the water less stable, she compensated
with supreme grace.
Wong glanced at Kyoshi as if to check what she was thinking. You can’t
possibly, was what.
He shrugged at her skepticism and followed his teammates skyward,
using earth and dust as Lek had, like it was no big deal. The sight of the
gigantic man defying all notions of gravity made her jaw drop. It looked
less like bending and more like spiritual chicanery, an invisible hawk lifting
Wong’s bulk over the roofline. Kyoshi watched him and Kirima run over
eaves and windowsills and the blank spaces of alley gaps with equal ease.
The whole show had happened in less than seconds. It was a mind-
blowing stunt. And highly unfortunate.
Because no one had taken into consideration that Kyoshi could not do
that. She expressly, with utmost certainty, could not do that.
“Cut her off!” a policeman shouted behind her. A second slab of rock
shot up to her right.
Left, then. She sprinted for the nearest remaining avenue and made it
out of the square before it was blocked shut. Immediately she knew it was a
mistake. The alley veered sharply away from the direction the others had
gone. The forks in the narrowing street had no markers, and each
subsequent guess she made only got her more lost. The houses squeezed in
on her as she ran, promising to throttle her by the gills like a fish in a net.
A blast of flame shot into the darkening sky. And then another, the
source slightly to the right. Rangi was signaling to her where to go. Kyoshi
felt her heart skip a beat for her friend. It was either that or a conniption
from running at full speed for so long.
She followed the upcoming bend in the direction of the fire, but so did
the lawmen. In fact, they used their knowledge of the town layout to steal a
march on her, suddenly popping into view closer behind her. She couldn’t
double back. And up ahead, a dead end loomed. The alley had been walled
up with bricks.
“No way out, girl!” an officer with admirable lung capacity bellowed.
Step, she thought to herself. Do the thing like they did. Her self-berating
voice sounded a lot like Rangi in her head.
It should be easier with more speed, right? She hurled herself toward
the wall, praying that she could Avatar herself into picking up a technique
she’d only seen once. Her on-the-run attempt to bend the necessary struts
without destroying the whole town resulted in only pitiful bumps of earth
appearing before her. They collapsed under her weight, tripping her up. She
fell forward uncontrollably, face-first. She wasn’t able to cross her arms in
front of her before she made impact.
Kyoshi shut her eyes as she slammed into the wall. There was a terrible
crash, an explosion of snapping bricks and tearing mortar. When she opened
them again, she was on the other side, still running.
She’d plowed straight through without feeling a thing. She must have
bent reflexively, flinched and wrapped herself in her own power like a
cloak. A quick glance back showed a Kyoshi-sized hole in the wall and
surprised guards trying to decide whether to leap through or go over the top.
In her distraction she collided with the corner of a house. Fear of broken
bones caused her to force her way through the clay structure the instant she
felt the pain of impact on her shoulder. The building stayed standing, a neat
chunk of it ripped off like a sampled loaf of bread.
Ahead of her the spaces between closed-up merchant shops were so
narrow that a person smaller than her would have had to stop and wedge
through sideways. Rangi sent up another beacon. The only way to get there
was as the bird flew. Kyoshi sent an apology into the cosmos for the
damage she was about to cause and barreled straight into the cluster of
buildings. If she couldn’t be a creature of grace, then she’d be a battering
ram.
She smashed through the first wall like it was rice paper. Inside, she
crossed the floor in a few steps and burst into the neighboring section,
boring a passageway through the cluster of storerooms. Each section she
stampeded through offered a momentary glimpse of different merchandise.
Dry goods, wet goods, weapons, ivory that was certainly illegal, fancy hats.
She was glad that she was only ruining inventory and not harming living
occupants with flying debris.
Her face felt tight and she wondered if she’d injured herself, ripped her
skin open. But no, she determined. She was grinning with a locked,
maddened expression, mindlessly exulting in her own power and
destruction. Once she realized it, she quickly worked her jaw back into a
grim frown and splashed through the next wall.
An unfamiliar sensation caused her to flail after hitting the last barrier. It
was freedom. She was in a broad street, going the right way for once. Up
above her on the rooftops, the whole crew sprang deftly from surface to
surface, bolstering themselves with their element when necessary.
“I see you made your own shortcut,” Kirima shouted. The water lifting
her up sparkled prettily in the moonlight, making her look like a lunar fairy.
Kyoshi checked behind her to see if anyone had followed the trail of
utter devastation she’d left through the town. “Where’s Rangi?”
“Still in the lead. That’s quite a companion you’ve got.”
There was another blaze of light that resembled a rocket climbing into
the night. Rangi had joined the daofei on their level. She ran as nimbly as
they did on the roof tiles, and when there was a leap too great to make
naturally, she stepped on jets of fire that blasted out of her feet, bounding in
propulsive arcs across the sky.
The sight made Kyoshi’s breath come to a standstill at the very time she
needed it flowing. Rangi was so beautiful, illuminated by moon and fire,
that it hurt. She was strength and skill and determination wrapped around an
unshakable heart.
Kyoshi had always admired Rangi. But right now, it felt as if she were
gazing at her friend through a pane of glass freshly cleaned. Some mighty
and loving spirit had reached down from the heavens and outlined the
Firebender in new strokes of color and vibrance.
There was a struggle in Kyoshi’s chest that had nothing to do with how
hard she was running, notes of longing and fear played in one chord. She
tamped the feeling down, not wanting to confront what it meant right now.
In any case, it was a poor time to be distracted.
Soon they exhausted their supply of houses to leap over. They reached
the shanties in the outskirts, causing more confusion for the residents who’d
seen Kyoshi and Rangi head inward for the night but now flee for their lives
in the opposite direction with three other people in tow.
Lek raced for the copse of trees without being told, perhaps
understanding that there were only a few places you could hide a ten-ton
bison. Kyoshi reached the copse in time to catch the boy as Pengpeng
roared and blasted him backward with wind.
“Easy, girl!” She coughed, her lungs burning from the run and inhaled
building dust. “They’re with us.”
Walking across the sky must have been a highly efficient technique,
because no one else seemed as tired as she. Rangi leaped onto Pengpeng’s
neck and unwound the reins from the saddle horn. The daofei climbed onto
the bison’s back, gripping her fur with strange familiarity. Once they were
settled, Rangi took Pengpeng up above the treeline.
Lek was ecstatic. “A bison!” he screamed, drumming on the saddle
floor. “A real bison!”
“Calm down!” Rangi said. “It’s not like you can’t see them near any Air
Temple.”
“He’s just excited because we used to have one of our own,” Wong said.
“Cute little fella named Longyan.”
Despite their need to move quickly, Rangi paused, leaving Pengpeng
swooping around in a gentle, idling circle. “Wait, how?” she said. “Only Air
Nomads can tame bison. The animals won’t listen to strangers if they’re
stolen.”
“We didn’t steal Longyan,” Kirima said. “He was Jesa’s bison.”
Rangi squinted in confusion and turned to Kyoshi. “But wasn’t Jesa . . .
your mother?”
Kyoshi winced. She spotted a reprieve from the awkward conversation,
albeit only a temporary one. On the ground below them, waving his hands,
was Lao Ge. He’d managed to escape the dozens of men who had him
surrounded and made it to the hiding spot in better time than anyone else.
The daofei didn’t look one bit surprised to see him. Rangi took
Pengpeng low and Wong leaned over, clasping hands with Lao Ge and
swinging him onto the saddle, again with the smooth ease of practice. “I
thought we might finally be rid of your stinking hide,” Lek yelled.
“Not quite so easy,” Lao Ge said. “Is anyone else thirsty? I could use—”
“Shut up,” Rangi snapped. She fixed Kyoshi with her gaze again. “Does
that mean what I think it means? About your mother?”
She looked hurt at another secret being kept from her. But Kyoshi had
honestly, sincerely forgotten to bring it up. It hadn’t been relevant until now.
“Yes,” Kyoshi said sheepishly. “My mother was an Airbender. I’m half
Air Nomad.”
She felt terribly guilty. She’d forced Rangi to absorb a lot in the past
day. Finding out that Kyoshi wasn’t the fully Earth Kingdom girl that Rangi
had assumed this whole time was yet another small weight added to the
pile.
But hearing that a despicable criminal and gang boss was an Air Nomad
would have been enough to shock and confuse anyone. People around the
world looked up to Airbenders as enlightened paragons who were free of
worldly concerns. They belonged to a benign, peaceful, monastic culture
that was so spiritually pure that every single member had bending ability.
Rangi resembled a child who’d just been told that the sweets tucked
underneath her pillow had been left by her parents instead of the Great
Harvest Spirit. Kirima and Wong detected the awkwardness between them
and remained silent. Lek wasn’t so observant.
“What’s everyone looking sour for?” he said, slapping Rangi and
Kyoshi on their backs. “We finally have a bison again! Our best days are
ahead of us!” He thrust his fists into the air and let out a whoop. “The
Flying Opera Company is back in business!”
They camped along the bank of a dried-up creek, hiding themselves by
virtue of being way out in the middle of nowhere. If the officers in
Chameleon Bay knew what direction they’d gone in, it still would have
taken at least a day by ostrich horse to catch up. They didn’t bother hiding
the fire Rangi blasted into the ground for them. It burned larger than they
needed, sputtering and crackling from unseasoned fuel. They ate the last of
the dried food.
Kirima and Wong fell asleep first, without asking about shifts. Lek
waded in the waterless creek, picking up a few polished stones that caught
his fancy before he settled in for the night.
Rangi was holding a grudge over how badly the day’s events had gone
—almost getting arrested by the local police, the daofei insinuating
themselves into their camp, the revelations about Kyoshi’s heritage—so the
two of them engaged in a silent, petty contest of wills to see who would fall
asleep next. Kyoshi had the advantage, knowing that there was probably a
nightmare waiting for her. She made sure Rangi was truly out cold before
laying the good blanket they’d kept hidden from the others over the
Firebender’s shoulders.
Kyoshi walked along the river, wobbling over pavestone-sized rocks
that had once been underwater, until she found Lao Ge sitting under a
gnarled tree. Half its roots had been washed clean in some long-ago flash
flood, while the rest clung tightly to the bank. The tree’s efforts were in
vain. It was dying.
Lao Ge’s eyes were closed in meditation. “You’re very loud,” he said.
She frowned. She’d practiced stepping lightly for years as a servant, to
move like a whisper so as not to distract guests.
“I mean your spirit is loud,” the old man said. “It rings in the air.
Sometimes it screams. Like right now—your body may be all the way over
there, but your spirit is grabbing me by the shoulders and howling in my
face. If you went to the Spirit World in your current condition, you’d cause
a typhoon the size of Ba Sing Se.”
“I know who you are,” Kyoshi said. “It took me a while to figure it out,
but after seeing you fight so many men at once, it was clear.”
He opened one eye a crack. Kyoshi had a theory that people who liked
meditating practiced that gesture to look good-humored and wise.
“You’re Tieguai the Immortal,” Kyoshi said.
“Oh?” Lao Ge said, fully interested now. “I suppose there was a
description of me in Jesa’s journal? Long white hair, great dancer,
devastatingly handsome?”
“It didn’t have that much detail. It said you were an underworld legend
rumored to be two hundred years old, but that’s obviously a tall tale.”
“Of course. I’m a man, not a spirit, after all.”
“I know it’s you because of a different description,” Kyoshi said.
“Tieguai fights with a crutch. I was looking for someone with a wooden
crutch or a bad leg. Then I saw you leaning on your earthbending while you
fought the lawmen in the square.”
Lao Ge sighed, as if he pitied her for putting two and two together. He
put his hands on his knees and raised himself to his feet. Then he tiptoed
down the web of roots until he was in Kyoshi’s face.
“Why would one such as yourself seek out Immortal Tieguai?” he said,
no longer an old man but a human-headed monster asking a riddle in
exchange for safe passage. “After all, your mother never did. She only
called me Lao Ge.”
The root he perched on shouldn’t have been able to support a bird let
alone a human being. Kyoshi swallowed hard. She had a sense of tumbling
downhill, her inner ears roiling like choppy seas. An inability to go back to
the harbor.
“Because she was afraid of you,” Kyoshi said. “She didn’t know when
you first joined the group, but her suspicions grew over time that you were
Tieguai the Assassin. Tieguai who killed the fortieth Earth King. She
figured out that you were using her smuggling gang as cover, to travel from
place to place as you eliminated targets for your own purposes. She was too
scared to confront you.”
The entries in her mother’s hand had been completely fearless while
describing dangerous smuggling jobs, burglaries, and skirmishes with local
militias. They were the musings of someone who’d thrilled to the life of a
daofei. But the journal also had patches that were rife with criminal
superstition, none more so than the scattered stories about a shadow who
moved across the Earth Kingdom, snuffing out lives both exalted and lowly
according to some unknowable design.
Jesa the smuggler had pieced together the pattern. Whenever the silly
old man in her gang slipped away by himself, a death would happen nearby.
Sometimes it would be a prominent noble who should have been safe
behind thick walls and numerous guards.
Lao Ge—the name had stuck hard—lowered his head and mouthed a
quick prayer for the dead. “That woman always was very observant. I’m
surprised I didn’t catch her catching me. So what is it that her daughter
wants? To bring me to justice?”
“No,” Kyoshi said. “I want you to teach me how to kill someone.”
If Lao Ge was surprised by her answer, he didn’t show it. “Hit them in
the head really hard with a rock.”
“No,” Kyoshi repeated. “Bending and killing are not the same thing.”
The image raced through her mind, the way Jianzhu had so casually done
the unspeakable, first to Yun and then to Kelsang. As easy as breathing.
It needed to be that easy for her. She could afford no mental block, no
hesitation when it came to taking his life. She had to be ready in all regards
when she next saw Jianzhu.
A breeze in the night air puckered her skin. “You should go to sleep,
girl,” Lao Ge said. “Because you’ve already learned lesson one.”
“So does that mean we’ll continue later”—she decided to test the waters
—“Sifu?”
“If and when I believe the time is right.”
She bowed and left him to his meditations, backing away out of distrust
as much as respect. Her footing was unsteady and threatened to roll her
ankles. Right before she was about to turn, Lao Ge spoke up again.
“I’d appreciate it if you didn’t tell the others about my independent
ventures,” he said. “I don’t wish to complicate matters with our little merry
band.”
The relationship between Lao Ge and the other daofei was not her
problem. But if that was the only leverage she had in order to get him to
teach her, she’d use it. “I wouldn’t dream of it, Sifu.”
Lao Ge smiled benignly. It reminded her of Jianzhu’s, only more
genuine. It reached his eyes. He had no need to hide what he was from her.
“And in return, I’ll keep your secret,” he said. “Kyoshi.”
