THE BEAST
The morning sunrise had never been so warm. Kyoshi had slept better on
the hard-packed shore of the lake, without a bedroll, than she had any of the
nights spent camping between Chameleon Bay and Hujiang. Perhaps that
was because she had her own fire now. She didn’t have to share it with
anyone else.
Rangi murmured into the base of her neck, a soft thrumming sensation.
A shadow loomed over them both. Kyoshi blinked until she saw a pair of
leather boots next to her head. Kirima squatted down closer to their level,
her hands on her knees and her chin in her hands.
“Have a nice night?” the Waterbender said, batting her eyelashes. She
grinned wider than the open sky.
Kyoshi rose to her elbows. Rangi slid off her chest and thumped her
head on the ground, startling awake. The leg she’d thrown across Kyoshi’s
body reluctantly unwound itself.
“Must have been nice,” Kirima said, barely able to contain her laughter.
“Sleeping under the stars. Just two friends. Having a close, private moment
of friendship.”
Kyoshi rubbed the drowsiness out of her face. She could leap to her feet
and deny everything. She had no idea what would happen if she and Rangi
kept pulling on this thread together. Few people in the Earth Kingdom
would react anywhere near as well as Kirima.
But ever since that day in Yokoya, when she’d learned her fate while
her hands were still dusted in white flour, her life had been an endless
refusal, full of secrets unhappily kept to their destructive ends. She was sick
of denying herself.
Not this time. This time would be different. A steady thought. The
drumbeat in her head and heart let her know the truth. She would never
back down from how she felt about Rangi.
Rangi caught her gaze and smiled, making a slight, barely there nod. A
ready if you are signal.
She was. And they were.
“It’s exactly what it looks like,” Kyoshi said. “You have a problem?”
Kirima shrugged and waved her fingers, dipping into a moment of quiet
seriousness. “I’m not the type to give you grief over whom you love,” she
said. Her mirth returned immediately. “I am, however, going to give you
tremendous amounts of grief about romancing within your own
brotherhood. That’s like doing laundry in the outhouse. It never ends
clean.”
Kyoshi got up. “First off, we knew each other before we met you.
Second, my parents founded this stupid gang, and they were obviously a
pair!”
“Good to see you carrying on the family tradition,” Kirima said. “Jesa
and Hark were mad about each other.”
Nothing could douse the moment for Kyoshi like a reminder of her
parents. She wondered if they still kissed, made eyes, whispered jokes after
they’d dropped her in Yokoya. Perhaps unburdening themselves had made
their relationship all the sweeter. She didn’t want to ask.
The darkness of her abandonment must have boiled to her surface as the
three of them trudged uphill back toward town, because Rangi ran the back
of her nails down Kyoshi’s hand, a playful and teasing distraction that held
more meaning now than a hundred volumes of history. Kyoshi nearly
tripped and fell on her face.
If this was what being true to herself felt like, she could never go back.
Her heart was nestled somewhere above her in the nearest cloud. She
wanted to scoop up Rangi in her arms and run, stepping higher and higher
using that technique she still had to learn, until they found it.
Kyoshi was so happy that Hujiang itself looked prettier in the new light
of day. Splotches of color caught her eye that weren’t visible in the
torchlight of the previous evening, blues and reds from beyond the Earth
Kingdom. The longhouses, she could see now, had individual touches like
carved shrine alcoves and Fire Nation rugs hung over doors. It reminded her
of the way ships would get personalities imprinted on them by their sailors.
Dust had yet to be kicked up by the day’s business, and the air was cleaner,
easier to breathe without the dingy haze.
They strolled through town—when was the last time Kyoshi had a
stroll? Had she ever?—and sidestepped the strewn bodies of men who slept
off hangovers, or beatings, or both. Kirima led them to one of the larger
establishments, where she ducked through a door with one of its posts
destroyed, like someone had been thrown out but not very accurately. She
returned moments later, bending a large blob of water that she had to have
found inside. It rolled down the steps like a slug.
Wong floated inside the reverse bubble, his head poking out the top. He
snored comfortably.
“Wake up!” Kirima shouted. With a flick of her arms, the water froze.
The big man jolted awake from the cold. He resembled a small iceberg with
his face poking out of the summit.
“Ugh, leave me in this for a while,” he said, bleary-eyed.
Kirima liquified the water again, dropping him to his feet, and bent it
away from his body, leaving him dry as a bone. She hurled the water back
inside the building, where it landed with a giant splash. Someone inside
screamed and sputtered.
“We’ve had enough of this town,” she said. Then she grinned at Kyoshi
and Rangi, without any attempt to hide the meaning in her stare. “Or at least
I have.”
Wong didn’t get the chance to interpret her stage gestures. A loud
crashing noise from somewhere near the bazaar punctured the silence of the
morning. It sounded like a house might have collapsed. Birds rose into the
sky, fluttering in distress.
Rangi frowned and leaned her ear toward the disturbance. “Was that a
landslide?”
“I don’t know,” Kirima said cautiously. “But the birds have the right
idea.”
Now the clamor of men shouting in horror could be heard over the
rooflines. “Never wait to find out what the trouble is,” Wong said, already
jogging away from the source. “By then, you’re already too close.”
If that wasn’t ancient wisdom, it should have been. They followed him
briskly back toward the inn. Hopefully Lek and Lao Ge were both there,
ready to fly. Judging by how fast the ruckus was catching up, they wouldn’t
have time to search the town on Pengpeng.
A horrendous snorting, choking sound rolled through the streets. Back
in her mansion days, Kyoshi had once seen an ambassador bring a pet
poodle monkey that was so inbred in the name of “cuteness” that it had
trouble breathing through its miniaturized snout. That was what she heard
now, on a scale a thousand times larger. The exhortations of a creature that
would never get its fill of air.
Two men ran screaming out of a longhouse, right on their heels. An
instant later, the building front exploded, planks and beams torn to shreds
by a dark, wiry mass that writhed with fury. A rope or a whip flung out with
the speed of a cable under tension and lashed the men across the back. They
fell to the ground, skidding on their faces, momentum making their legs
scorpion over their heads.
“Tui’s gills!” Kirima shouted. “What is that thing!?”
Behind them was a beast that Kyoshi had never seen the likes of before,
a black-and-brown four-legged monstrosity that stood higher at the shoulder
than some of the huts. It managed to be hulking with muscle and yet
lissome as a serpent at the same time. Claws as long and sharp as sickle
blades reaped at the ground, opening damp wounds under the dusty surface.
But the most hideous part of the creature was its dark void of a face.
The furry, elongated skull had no eyes, only a flowering pink snout that
wriggled with its own fleshy protuberances. It was as if a parasite from
another world had attached itself to the nose of an earthly beast and taken
control over the entire animal. Two large dark holes, nostrils, sucked air in
all directions until they pointed straight at Kyoshi.
She backed away slowly, ineffectually, surprised she could manage that.
The nausea of terror chained her, robbed her of survival instinct. Her skin
felt wet and cold.
Again, was the only thought running through her mind. Again, Jianzhu
had loosed a nightmare on her, an inhuman specter that would drag her
away into the darkness, screaming. It had to be him. There was no one else
who could have scraped the depths of her fear like this. Somehow, she knew
in her bones it was he who taunted her with this living aberration.
A wall of earth shot up between her and the animal. She hadn’t bent it.
“What are you doing?” Wong roared as he followed through on his
attack. “Either fight or run! Don’t stand there where we can’t help you!”
The monster clambered over the wall he made with ease, its claws
letting it climb as fast as it ran. Kirima pulled more water from a nearby
trough and smashed at the beast’s shoulders, trying to knock it off-balance.
Rangi kicked low sheets of flame at the places it tried to land its forepaws,
reasoning that it was as effective to break an animal’s root as it was a
normal opponent.
That’s right, Kyoshi thought. I’m not alone this time.
The street was wide enough to accommodate her earthbending
weakness. She knifed at the air in front of her, and the entire surface of the
road began to grind and shift. A fissure opened, and one of the animal’s
paws fell in. If she could close the gap fast enough, she could pin it by the
—
The monster, rather than avoid the jaws of her trap, dove headfirst into
the rift. Its entire body disappeared belowground, leaving a pile of castings
behind.
“This thing can burrow!?” Kirima sounded more aggrieved than afraid,
like an experienced gambler discovering the table they’d joined was
blatantly rigged against them.
Kyoshi felt vibrations beneath her. It was impossible not to, with a
creature that size, but they were indistinct and directionless. Not a help in
this situation.
“Spread out,” Rangi said, eying the ground.
“Shouldn’t we stay close?” Kyoshi said.
“No,” Rangi said. “Then it’ll get more than one of us in a single bite.”
Kyoshi may have been feeling warm with newfound camaraderie for
her gang, but no one had told Wong and Kirima. After hearing Rangi, they
immediately leaped onto the roof of the nearest house, elements trailing
below the soles of their feet, leaving her and Kyoshi down below.
The soil loosened around them, a perfect circle caving in. Rangi tackled
Kyoshi out of the center of the formation, boosting herself sideways with
flame jets from her feet. They landed hard on their sides, shoulders
bruising. The creature burst through the surface, rearing toward the sky, the
ground giving birth to a shape of death that blacked out the sun above.
There was a zipping sound, and then a thud. The animal screamed, and
its claws came down short of Kyoshi and Rangi’s bodies. It shook its head
furiously.
Another impact, and this time Kyoshi saw it. A smooth, fist-sized stone
had struck the beast hard on the tip of its sensitive nose, sending it reeling.
She looked up and made out Lek’s silhouette on the roof of their inn, the
sun behind him shrouding his face.
“Move, maybe?” he shouted.
A hail of perfectly aimed stones gave them cover, each missile landing
uncannily on the one spot that the animal seemed to feel pain, no matter
how much it thrashed about. It backed away, trying to hide its nose. As
Kyoshi and Rangi fled toward Lek, several arrows struck it in the
hindquarters. It turned to face the new threat.
The daofei had gotten over their surprise and were now mobbing the
beast, thrusting spears at it and pricking its fur with shortbows. They sought
the glory of bringing it down. The animal lashed out with its tongue,
sending a row of men falling to the ground, but more swordsmen-turned-
hunters stepped over their limp bodies to replace them.
Kyoshi didn’t care to understand the bizarre scene playing out before
her. She and the rest of the group ran for the hills.
They arrived at Pengpeng’s cave in the mountainside winded, their legs and
lungs burning, to find Lao Ge feeding the bison a pile of cabbages. He
tossed them one at a time high in the air for Pengpeng to catch between her
broad, flat teeth. There was probably no use asking him how he’d acquired
the produce.
“A lot of help you were!” Lek shouted. He was assuming, like Kyoshi
was at this point, that Lao Ge was completely aware of what had transpired.
The old man gave him a pitying look. “Fighting a shirshu? That’s just a
bad investment of effort. I left as soon as I felt it coming.”
“You knew what that abomination was?” Kirima said.
“It’s a legendary subterranean beast that hunts by scent,” he explained
dismissively, like they would have known this if they’d paid better attention
to his ramblings. “Supposedly it can track its quarry across stone, water,
dirt, thin air. In the old days, Earth Kings would use them to execute their
political enemies. For the traitor, let them be hounded by shirshu until they
drop where they stand, far from their homes and the bones of their
ancestors.”
Lao Ge fed Pengpeng another cabbage. “Or at least that’s how the
saying went. Shirshu haven’t been seen in the wild for at least a generation,
so I assume this one was being used to hunt a fugitive too. Same as in the
days of yore.”
Kyoshi felt Lek’s gaze boring into her. “It was going for you,” he said.
“I could see it from the roof of the inn. It was sniffing out your scent. You
brought it here.”
She hesitated. Had she been as smooth as Yun, she could have come up
with a convincing denial on the spot.
Before she could say anything, she was preempted by the metallic
clanking of blades rattling in their scabbards. They leaned over the cave
ledge to see a party of swordsmen down below. At the back of the group,
exhorting them onward, was Brother Wai. Mok’s inquisitor looked like he
wished to speak with whomever he was searching for, very much.
“I can explain,” Kyoshi said quickly. “But maybe once we’re in the
air?”
There was silent and unanimous agreement as they scrambled onto
Pengpeng. The truth took a back seat to survival.
