PREPARATIONS
The journey to Te’s palace was a painful blur. Each moment spent on solid
ground was devoted to training. The daofei adopted their new roles as her
teachers with relish. Criminals liked their hierarchies, and the Flying Opera
Company had just established a brand-new one, with Kyoshi at the bottom.
“No!” Wong shouted. “It’s fan open, fan closed, high block, dainty steps
backward, big lunge forward, leg sweep! The fan is not a weapon! It’s an
extension of your arm!”
The man had never been much for words before, but when it came to
fighting with the fan, he transformed into a tyrannical stage director, with
the ego and perfectionism to match. “I could remember the moves better if
you didn’t make me sing the full works of Yuan Zhen while we do this!”
Kyoshi said, huffing and puffing in the open field they’d landed in. The rest
of the group sat in the shade of a persimmon tree overlooking an empty
field, munching on the astringent fruit and enjoying the breeze while
Kyoshi toiled under the sun.
Wong was highly offended. “The singing is breath control practice!
Power and voice both come from the center! Again! With emotional content
this time!”
No matter how difficult fan practice got, she toughed it out. The rewards
were bounding leaps in progress with her earthbending. With her fans in
hand, she could narrow her focus to kick rocks at targets and raise walls of
stone like a normal Earthbender, albeit one with a sloppy, informal
technique. Still, after all those years of fearing she’d destroy the countryside
with the smallest act of bending, using her mother’s weapons was
liberating. It was so effective, it felt like cheating.
“It is cheating,” Lek said as they volleyed pebbles back and forth at
each other in the mouth of a cave while the others set up camp. “Sure, some
Earthbenders amplify their power with weapons like hammers and maces,
but what are you going to do if you don’t have your fans? Ask for a rules
change?”
“How is someone going to steal my fans?” Kyoshi said. The flight of
the pebbles picked up speed, their arcs growing sharper. “I always have
them with me.”
“It might not be theft,” Lek said. “You might voluntarily leave them
behind. The first rule of smuggling is Don’t get caught with the goods. Your
parents knew that. That’s probably why they stashed the fans with you in
that hick abider town.”
Kyoshi’s temper flared. One, she found herself longing for Yokoya
these days, much to her surprise. Not the people, but the harsh, wild
landscape where the wooded mountains met the sea and salt air. The interior
Earth Kingdom often felt like a brown monotone, a flat expanse that
changed little from one landing site to the next. She decided she didn’t
appreciate people looking down on the unique little part of it where she’d
met Kelsang.
And two, she’d never gotten over the resentment she felt toward Lek,
each moment her parents had spent with him instead of her. It didn’t matter
if he was simply a gang member to them. They’d found him useful, decided
he had a purpose. Her? Not so much.
She could have explained her feelings to him. Instead, she sliced at the
flying pebbles with her fans, cracking them cleanly into hemispheres, and
sent twice as many projectiles back at Lek. Can you do that, with or without
a weapon?
He yelped and threw himself to the floor. The shot blast of stone zinged
into the cave wall above him, showering him in dust. Playtime had gotten
far too rough.
“I’m sorry!” Kyoshi cried out, covering her mouth in horror with the
spread fan. She could have put out his eye, or worse.
He got up with a scowl on his face. But then he remembered something.
His glower turned into a grin so smug it could have illuminated the rest of
the cave.
“It’s fine,” he said, patting the dirt off his pants. “Though I’ll have to
tell Rangi about your lapse in control.”
Whatever remorse Kyoshi felt vanished. “You snot-nosed little—”
He raised a finger patiently like an enlightened guru. “Bup-bup. That’s
Sifu Snotnose to you.”
Kyoshi could firebend without her fans.
That one bad attempt after their escape from Chameleon Bay was a
distant memory. Since then, some kind of blockage had cleared. The flame
felt straightforward, a power that merely needed to be set free instead of
prodded or manipulated like earth.
It made no sense to her how she had a critical weakness with her native
element but could produce fire decently for a beginner. The reason could
have been that Rangi was a great teacher, as might be expected from the
scion of great teachers.
“No,” Rangi said. “It’s your emotional state.”
The little training area they’d built stood at the end of an isolated
shepherd’s path leading away from a small town in a valley below. Rangi
faced her on a long, narrow beam of earth that she’d ordered Kyoshi to raise
from the ground. Balancing on it was hard enough, but then they’d started
to run through firebending forms and light sparring. The linear exercise
meant she’d need to concentrate on resisting and overcoming with positive
jing instead of staying still or evading.
“Of all bending disciplines, fire is the most affected by inner turmoil,”
Rangi said, punching a flame downward at Kyoshi’s front foot, forcing her
to pull it back. “The fact that its coming easier to you now means you’re
feeling more relaxed and natural.”
Kyoshi snap-kicked her new leading leg. A crescent of fire sliced
upward, and Rangi had to reconsider how much pressure she wanted to
apply. “Isn’t that a good thing?” Kyoshi asked.
“No! Why would it be? You feel loose and breezy when you’re
surrounded by daofei, about to risk your life for them in what’s essentially
an act of treason against the Earth Kingdom!?” Rangi spun on the balls of
her feet, perfectly centered, with more dance-like beauty than Kyoshi could
ever have mustered. A horizontal skirt of flame billowed out from her
waist, exactly at a height too awkward for Kyoshi to jump over or duck
easily.
Rangi hadn’t accounted for her opponent’s complete lack of shame.
Kyoshi dropped to her belly like a worm, hugging the sides of the beam for
stability, and let the wave of fire pass over her. She popped back up to see
Rangi looking at her with disapproval in her eyes. And it was about more
than her lowly escape.
“You’re firebending now,” Rangi said. “Dare I say, you might even be
good at it. There’s no reason to continue on this path. We could go to the
sages and prove you’re the Avatar.”
Kyoshi thought this matter had been settled, but apparently not. “Which
ones, exactly?” she said. “Because the only sages I know are the names
from Jianzhu’s guest lists! Should we try Lu Beifong? The man who thinks
of Jianzhu like his own son? Or maybe someone at the court of Omashu!
Omashu is practically his summer home!”
“We could go to my mother,” Rangi said, her voice barely audible.
Kyoshi dropped her fighting stance. If she caught a fireball to the face,
she deserved it. She’d essentially separated Rangi from her only family. It
was a nagging guilt that Kyoshi had been able to ignore, solely because of
her friend’s strength. This was the first time Rangi had cracked along that
plane.
“Do you really think she’d take our side over his?” Kyoshi asked. She
didn’t mean for the question to be defiant. The friendship between the
Avatar’s companions in eras past was the stuff of legend. It was said that
two of Yangchen’s close friends and bending teachers had died protecting
her from her enemies. The prospect of Hei-Ran choosing Jianzhu over her
own daughter had to be considered.
Rangi’s face wilted further. “I don’t know,” she said after a while. Her
shoulders were heavy with dejection. “I couldn’t be certain. I guess if we
can’t trust my own mother, then we can’t trust anyone.”
It did not feel good to win this argument. Kyoshi stepped along the
beam carefully until she could put her arms around Rangi. “I’m sorry,” she
said. “I’ve taken so much from you. I don’t know how to make it right.”
Rangi wiped her nose and pushed Kyoshi away. “You can start by
promising me you’ll be a great Avatar. A leader who’s virtuous and just.”
The comment knocked Kyoshi off-balance better than a kick to her
knee. She couldn’t reconcile her friend’s righteous desires with the dark
conclusions of Lao Ge. Entertaining the wisdom of an assassin was already
a betrayal of Rangi’s trust. What would happen if Kyoshi took the old
man’s test and passed?
Rangi lined up a big attack to knock her off the beam, purposely
exaggerating her own motions and openings to let her student counter-hit
her. But Kyoshi couldn’t capitalize on them. She backed away until she ran
out of space, forlornly waving her hands in a mockery of firebending, heat
sputtering from her fingers.
Luck intervened before she humiliated herself further. “You two have
been here all morning,” Kirima called out as she approached along the trail.
“It’s my turn with Kyoshi.”
“Buzz off!” Rangi yelled. She took the fire she’d been winding between
her hands and redirected it high above Kirima’s head.
Since the night they spent in the marble quarry, Rangi’s personal
attitude toward Kirima had gone steeply downhill. Kyoshi had no idea why.
They were both talented benders who married intelligence with precision.
She’d trust either of their judgments in a pinch.
Kirima didn’t flinch from the fire blast. The waves of heat fluttered her
hair and illuminated her sharp face in golden hues, an effect that was rather
pretty. “You’re not setting a very good example for the baby Avatar,
Topknot. Too much rage will stunt her growth.”
“Stop calling me that!” Rangi fumed.
Maybe that was it, the constant teasing. Kyoshi wondered how Rangi
put up with the nickname for so long. In the Fire Nation, hair was heavily
linked with honor. She’d heard that sometimes the losers of an important
Agni Kai would shave parts of their head bald, laying patches of their scalp
bare to symbolize an extra level of humility from their defeat, but the
topknot was always sacred. It was never touched except in circumstances
akin to death.
Kirima bowed in mockery. “As you wish, my good Hotwoman. I’m
coming back in five minutes.”
After she disappeared, Kyoshi put her hand on Rangi’s shoulder. “Did
something happen between the two of you?”
Rangi responded with her new favorite way of avoiding the subject.
“Stance training,” she said.
“We already did stance training!”
“Lek said you went berserk in the cave. We’re moving to two a day.
Horse. Now.”
Kyoshi groaned and pressed her feet together. She shuffled them to the
sides, alternating between heels and toes, until they were wider than her
shoulders. She kept quiet as she lowered her waist, or else Rangi would
make her hold a log or some other heavy object they could find lying
around.
Rangi circled her, looking for any weakness where she could strike. “Do
not move,” she said, right before stepping carefully onto Kyoshi’s bent
knee.
“I hate you so much!” Kyoshi yelled as Rangi draped her bodyweight
over her shoulders.
“The exercise is to maintain composure in the face of distraction! Now
maintain!”
Kyoshi put up with the asymmetrical agony until Rangi dropped back
down to the ground. “I don’t want her teaching you waterbending,” Rangi
said as she moved threateningly into Kyoshi’s blind spot.
“Why?” Kyoshi felt Rangi leap onto her back, clinging to her like a
rucksack. “Agh! Why!”
“There’s a proper order to training the Avatar,” Rangi said. “The cycle
of the seasons. Earth, fire, air, water. It’s not good to deviate from that
pattern. You have to master the other elements before water.”
“Again, why?” There were only four airbending temples in the world. If
she tried to seek out a master there, Jianzhu would find her more easily than
anywhere else.
“Because!” Rangi snapped. “They say bad things happen when an
Avatar tries to defy the natural order of bending. Ill fortune befalls them.”
Kyoshi had never known Rangi to lean on superstition. Tradition,
however, was another matter. She could tell that each time they ignored an
established practice regarding the Avatar, the knife twisted in Rangi’s heart
a little bit more.
But Kyoshi owed it to her not to make a promise she couldn’t keep.
“I’m going to use every weapon I have at my disposal,” she said. That was
the truth.
Rangi let go of her. “I know. I can’t stop you from training with Kirima.
It’s just that as soon as you start waterbending in earnest, our chance to do
things the right way dies. Forever. It can’t be brought back.”
Hearing it phrased that way made Kyoshi glummer than she’d expected.
She stared at the ground in front of her. Rangi’s feet came into view.
“Come on,” she said. “Cheer up. I didn’t mean to send you into a
spiral.”
“I can’t cheer up. I’m in Horse stance.”
“I like your focus,” Rangi said. “But see if you can withstand this.”
She slid between Kyoshi’s arms and gave her a head-tilting, knee-
buckling kiss, as powerful and deep as the ocean after a storm.
Kyoshi’s eyes went wide before they shut forever. She sank into
heavenly darkness. Her backbone turned to liquid. “Maintain,” Rangi
murmured, her lips like a feather on Kyoshi’s before she attacked again,
with added ferocity this time.
Kyoshi never wanted the torment to end. Rangi pressed into her like
metal glowing on an anvil, scorching her where their skin met. Fingers ran
through Kyoshi’s hair, twisting and pulling to remind her how delightfully
at the Firebender’s mercy she was.
After a hundred years had passed, Rangi broke contact, gently and
deliberately breathing a wisp of steam down Kyoshi’s neck, a parting gift of
heat that drifted underneath her clothes.
She leaned in for one last seductive whisper. “You still have seven
minutes left to go,” Rangi said.
Kyoshi kept her complaints to herself. It was a decent trade, all things
considered.
“Your water and air chakras are overflowing,” Lao Ge said.
He sounded like it was an embarrassment, as if Kyoshi had wandered
outside her home without being fully dressed. She’d braved coming to him
while the others were still awake, bedded down by the embers of the
campfire. Rangi was probably staring at the sky, vigilant to her last
moments of consciousness.
Lao Ge lay on his side in the grass, his head propped upon his hand so
he could watch a pair of fireflies circle each other, tracing erratic patterns
through the air. Kyoshi had long since gathered that the man had very little
need to ever look at her.
“I don’t know what chakras are,” she said.
“What they are is either open or closed. For the sake of predictability, I
prefer working with people who have all seven of them open or all seven of
them closed. An accomplice with only some of their chakras unblocked can
be easily swayed by their strongest, most gnarled-up emotion.”
Kyoshi assumed the term had something to do with energy movement
within the body. Not much of a stretch, since controlling internal qi was the
basis of all bending.
“Your feelings of pleasure and love are butting up against a wall of
grief,” he said. “And guilt. Grief I can work with, but guilt makes for a poor
killer. Have you second thoughts about your man?”
“No,” she said. “Never.” Lao Ge rolled over to his other side. She
waited, letting him examine her to see she wasn’t bluffing. Jianzhu was part
of her blood by now. He was the back of her hands.
But this Te person was not. “I don’t know if I can help you kill the
governor,” she said. “Helping Mok free a prisoner is one thing, but an
assassination in cold blood is another.” Kyoshi wondered why she didn’t
reject Lao Ge immediately the other night. Speaking the action out loud
made it ludicrous. “There’s no reason for me to help you.”
The old man blew his nose on his sleeve. “Have you ever heard of Guru
Shoken?” he asked. Kyoshi shook her head.
“He was an ancient philosopher, a contemporary of Laghima’s. Not as
popular though. He had a proverb: ‘If you meet the spirit of enlightenment
on the road, slay it!’”
She wrinkled her brow. “I can see why he’s not popular.”
“Yes, he was considered heretical by some. But wise by others. One
interpretation of that particular saying is that you cannot be bound by petty
concerns on your personal journey. You must walk with a singular purpose.
The judgment of others, no matter how horrific or criminal they label your
actions, must hold no meaning to you.”
“I can’t do that,” Kyoshi said. “I care what she thinks of me. I don’t
know if I could handle disappointing her.”
Lao Ge knew whom Kyoshi was talking about. “Your hesitation seems
to be less about your own morals than hers. In fact, without your Firebender
tethering you to this world, you might feel no compunction at all. Perhaps
that’s why you feel guilt. You’re only one step away from Guru Shoken’s
ideal, and it disturbs you.”
This was the sorry state of Kyoshi’s Avatarhood. Heartlessness the new
enlightenment. Murder the means to self-discovery. If she ever resurfaced in
the legitimate world, she would create a stain as dark as loam in the history
books.
“Don’t look so compromised,” Lao Ge said. “Yangchen was a devoted
reader of Shoken.”
Kyoshi glanced up at him.
“She studied his opponents as well,” he said. “But I don’t feel like
giving you their philosophical arguments. It doesn’t serve my purposes.”
She remembered the notes in her mother’s journal, about the rumored
longevity of Tieguai the Immortal. “Are you him?” she said. “Are you
Shoken?” If her wild accusation was right, it would have made the man
before her older than the Four Nations themselves.
Lao Ge snorted and rolled on his back, closing his eyes. “Of course
not.” He settled in to sleep. “I was always much better looking than that
fool.”
