CONCLUSIONS
Jianzhu had learned his lesson. No caravans. No roads. As soon as he
received the message from the shirshu tracker team, delivered by hawk,
he’d gone through the enormous, preposterous expense of buying rare eel
hounds. The fastest cross-country mounts besides a flying bison. A whole
herd of them.
In the annals of the Earth Kingdom, ancient nomadic barbarians had
traveled great distances, surprising footslogging armies with such tactics. A
single rider would bring multiple mounts on a journey, switching between
them on the fly to keep the animals as fresh and speedy as possible. From
the ranks of his newly replenished guardsmen, he’d chosen two on the basis
of their riding ability and set out with eight eel hounds between them.
They’d been told as little as possible, but from his urgency it was easy to
guess that their quest was important.
They reached the mountains of Ba Sing Se in astonishing time, with
barely a witness to mark their passing. Early on, one mount had broken its
leg in a singing groundhog’s hole and needed to be put down. Another died
from exhaustion on the far shore of West Lake.
But other than that, the constant, mindless riding, the wind in his hair,
had been good for Jianzhu’s spirit. As much as he missed Hei-Ran’s
company, he needed the occasional freedom from her watchful gaze. The
party had brought more messenger hawks with their baggage, carefully
caged and hooded. Jianzhu had promised to send word to her as soon as
possible.
The location where he was set to meet the trackers was a small trailhead
leading into the foothills of the southern Taihua range. The gentle slope of
grassy green knolls was punctured by rows of red-stone crags jutting
upward, uniformly following the same angle and grain. The rocks were as
tall and numerous as the trees in a forest.
Jianzhu saw a lone figure in the middle of the stones waving them over
and frowned. The message that had brought him here in such a hurry had
explained, with overflowing apologies, that the shirshu had followed the
scent trail to these mountains. Right before they’d lost control of the
animal. It had escaped and run up the peaks in pursuit of its prey. For all he
knew, it might have eaten the Avatar.
The handlers must have drawn lots to see which one would face his
wrath in person while the rest looked for the shirshu. He spurred his hound
toward the unlucky representative. The man’s waving was stiff and forced,
like the motion of a waterwheel.
“You can stop,” Jianzhu called out. “I see you—”
A whistle and then a thump. The lone tracker keeled over, two arrows in
his back.
Jianzhu cursed and leaped off his mount, more arrows crossing the air
above his saddle. He tented slabs of earth around him and hunkered down
in his cover, listening to the thunks of projectiles landing around him.
I am getting much too old for this. He never would have fallen for such
an obvious trap in his younger days.
There was a pause in the firing. He chambered his fists and punched
outward. The slabs that had protected him now splintered and flew outward
in all directions like shrapnel from a bombard. He heard screams from the
rocks above.
Taking in his surroundings as quickly as possible, he saw a few archers
who’d fallen from their perches lying at the base of the crags. But, better
safe than sorry. He lowered his stance, shook his waist, and whirled his
arms. From base to top, every stone he could see violently sprouted thin
spikes the size of jians, like they’d instantly transformed into the same
species of Si Wong cactus.
He heard more screams from the archers who remained hidden in their
cover behind the rocks. That should have been it for elevated opponents.
Fighters who fancied themselves professionals, but weren’t, often made the
mistake of taking the high ground without planning a way out.
His eel hound had run off. But two of them were still nearby, tethered
by their reins to a heavy weight. The corpse of one of the guardsmen,
studded with arrows. The reins had snagged on his wrist.
Good job, whatever your name was, Jianzhu thought.
The other guardsman was busy wiping the blood off his dao with a hank
of grass. Three attackers lay at his feet. They’d charged him with melee
weapons, and bizarre ones at that. Jianzhu thought he spotted an abacus
made of iron on the ground.
He was still impressed. “What do they call you, son?”
The guardsman snapped to attention and stared above Jianzhu’s head
with youthful, bright eyes. He had the strong brow of Eastern Peninsula
ancestry. “Saiful, sir.”
It was likely Saiful didn’t understand how close of a call this was.
Talent would only let you survive so many encounters. After that, the odds
tended to catch up with a vengeance. “Excellent work, Saiful. There’s
always opportunity for a quick blade on my staff. I’ll remember this.”
The young guardsman kept his thrill contained as best he could. “Thank
you, sir.”
Jianzhu nudged a body onto its back. The dead man was clothed in the
standard attire of a bandit, in the sense that he wore whatever peasant
clothing he’d taken with him from his last legitimate occupation. This one
had the trousers of a sailor or a sailmaker, mended repeatedly with fine
sewing skill.
But there was an odd detail on his shirt. He’d stuck a flower in his lapel.
It was too ruined to see what kind.
Jianzhu checked another body. It had no decoration on its person, but he
backtracked along the path the man had charged and found what he was
looking for on the ground. A dried moon peach blossom.
A badge, Jianzhu thought with some vehemence.
He straightened up and looked around. The mountains loomed nearby.
They were said to be uninhabited. Practically impassable. Yet these men
weren’t clothed for an expedition.
With a sudden burst of energy he slammed his palm against the ground.
Tremors rang through the earth, spreading wide like ripples in a pond.
“Sir, are you . . . searching for something underground?” Saiful asked.
“Maybe,” Jianzhu said, his attention skimming over the grass. “Though
what I’m doing right now is preserving their footprints.”
He continued along the trail left by Saiful’s opponents, watching the
indentations they made with their heels and toes in the dirt, examining
where they left mud on grass. A long time ago, he’d tracked criminals down
in such a way, by listening to the earth and reading its marks.
The prints, in reverse, led to a clearing with a conspicuous gray rock the
size of a chair. Jianzhu waved it away with a brush of his hand. Underneath
was a wooden trap door.
“A hidden passage?” Saiful asked.
Jianzhu nodded grimly. “Hidden passage. Through the mountains.”
“Sir . . . is this town supposed to be here?” Saiful said.
“No,” Jianzhu said, his teeth grinding together.
Though he couldn’t see underground, knowing the tunnel was there
allowed Jianzhu to make various educated guesses with earthbending and
knowledge of stonework to determine a path. They’d followed the network
up the mountain on their eel hounds, forcing aside blocked passages and
relying on the agility of their unusual mounts to see them through.
Eventually the obstacles parted to reveal a great crater nestled in the
heights, and in that bowl, waiting for them, was a village that neither of
them had ever heard of before.
An entire settlement not on any map, out of reach of the law. Jianzhu’s
rage was almost too great for him to swallow. He was a storekeeper who
would never be rid of vermin, a servant who would never be able to polish
the silver clean.
The town appeared to be abandoned. They rode through empty streets,
between longhouses that made a mockery of the Four Nations with
adornments either looted or crudely imitated from their places of origin.
One particular scrap-quilted banner had been fastened together so that
characters from multiple signs clumsily formed the syllables Hu and Jiang.
Hujiang. So that was the name of this dungheap.
“There’s our shirshu, sir,” Saiful said. He pointed down the street where
a dark, foul-smelling mound blocked the way.
The beast lay in relatively dignified repose. Other than the flies buzzing
around its face—or lack thereof—it was still whole. Any trophy hunters
would have found very quickly that toxins still coursed through its dead
body.
Professor Shaw would be upset though. Jianzhu would need to come up
with a cover story and a convincing amount of hush money to keep the
man’s anger from casting suspicion.
A brief scraping noise came from the house to his right. There was
someone inside. Jianzhu dismounted and approached the darkened building.
“Sir?” Saiful whispered. “Going alone is a bad idea.”
Jianzhu waved him off. “Patrol the street.”
He slipped inside, contouring against the door frame rather than
standing fully in the entrance, where he would be outlined by sunlight.
Judging from the long tables and low backless stools, the building was
some kind of inn or tavern. It made him furious again, that these outlaws
had enjoyed enough peace in these mountains to build gathering places and
sell each other wine.
Jianzhu walked around the tavern’s counter. He found the person who’d
made the noise.
It was a man sitting on a pile of pillows. He was muscled and scarred
like a fighter, though it would seem he’d fared poorly in his last outing. One
of his legs was wrapped in cloth and splinted up to his hip.
The injured man stared at Jianzhu with the empty, wary expression of
being caught out. Jianzhu noticed empty bottles within his arms reach, jars
of half-eaten food. He pieced it together. The inhabitants of the settlement
had evacuated some days ago, probably scared away by the shirshu. The
ambush at the base of the mountain had been a rearguard, or a bunch of
greedy opportunists who’d lagged behind. This man with the broken leg
couldn’t make the journey down at all, so his companions had left him here
to recover.
Jianzhu’s eyes went to a small, out-of-place vase. It had a moon peach
blossom in it. “I’m looking for a girl,” he said to his recuperating friend.
“She was here at some point. A very tall girl, taller than you or me. Pretty
face, freckles, doesn’t speak much. Have you seen her?”
The man’s eyebrows twitched. It could have been an attempt to conceal
the truth, or it could have been his memory sparking but failing to light.
“She would have been accompanied by a Firebender. Another girl,
black hair, military bearing—”
Jianzhu caught the spear-hand strike aimed at his throat and redirected it
into the nearby shelf, smashing the uprights. The man could add a broken
wrist to his troubles. Jianzhu watched him seethe with pain.
The injured fighter tucked his bad hand under his good arm. “I am Four
Shadows Guan,” he snarled with pride. “And I will tell you nothing. I know
a man of the law when I see one.”
Jianzhu believed him. Once these types told you their professional
name, there was no more rational conversation to be had. He would try one
more tactic, a play on the daofei’s emotions.
He plucked the moon peach blossom from its vase and twirled the stem
between his thumb and forefinger. “Times have changed,” he said. “In my
younger days I remember tracking this small group around the edges of the
desert, from watering hole to watering hole. The Band of the Scorpion, they
called themselves. There couldn’t have been more than a dozen members.”
Jianzhu caught what he was looking for, the man snorting in derision at
a brotherhood that small. Which meant his group was much larger.
“The funny thing was, when I caught up with them, I found out why
they were moving so slowly,” he went on. “Two of their members had
caught foot rot and couldn’t walk. The others fashioned litters and carried
them through the desert, the whole time. The group would have escaped me
if they had left their sick behind, but they chose to stay together. They chose
brotherhood.”
He crushed the flower. “That’s what Followers of the Code used to be
like. When I look at you, abandoned by your sworn brothers, I don’t see
that tradition. I don’t see honor.”
Jianzhu let a flying gob of spit hit him in the face. “The brothers of the
Autumn Bloom are willing to die for each other,” the man said, wiping his
lips. “You would never understand. Our cause makes us—”
He paused, realizing that Jianzhu was manipulating him. Four Shadows
Guan was smarter than he looked. He clenched his jaw and slammed back
against his makeshift bedrest.
Jianzhu grimaced and rolled up his sleeves. So much for doing this the
easy way.
He stepped into the sunlight and wiped his hands on a nearby saddle blanket
that had been hung up to dry and forgotten.
The Autumn Bloom, he thought to himself. The Autumn Bloom.
Who in the name of Oma’s bastard children were the Autumn Bloom?
Jianzhu really was getting too old. He’d never heard of this gang before.
He, the man who’d once single-handedly kept half the continent from
falling into lawlessness, had let a new criminal outfit large enough to
populate a good-sized village operate within shouting distance of the
capital. The Autumn Bloom, whoever they were and whatever their goals,
had a level of organization high enough to evacuate the settlement the
moment they suspected an intrusion.
And more importantly, most importantly, the only thing that was
important, was that they now held the Avatar in their clutches. The girl had
been here at some point, that was certain. She must have planned to hide in
the remote mountains and fallen into an ambush, like he nearly did. She’d
been captured and taken to this headquarters. Shirshu followed living
scents, and the animal would not have come here if she were dead.
Jianzhu cursed the spirits and mankind alike, cursed the threads of fate
that had formed this knot. The Avatar had been kidnapped by daofei.
He threw his head back and stared at the sky for answers. Out of the
corner of his eye he watched a bird fly away, its long tail plumage trailing
behind it like a streamer. Some obscure cultures read the future through the
patterns of winged creatures. Jianzhu wondered if that would have worked,
if birds could have found the girl at birth and saved them this trouble. He
heaved a great sigh.
Saiful rounded the corner and came back into the street, trotting back
over to his boss. “Did you find anything inside, sir?”
“Just a corpse.” He looked at the young swordsman. Saiful, along with a
handful of other men, had answered Jianzhu’s call for more fighters after
the encounter with Tagaka left the ranks of his guard depleted. Perhaps a
little too quickly and conveniently, now that he thought about it.
“Saiful, I didn’t tell you to send a message with one of our hawks,”
Jianzhu said.
The young man looked surprised. “I was, uh, relaying ahead for
supplies,” he said. His hand drifted toward his weapon. He was a capable
warrior, unafraid to kill for pay. A mercenary who swore loyalty as long as
the wages were good. When you got right down to it, there was really no
difference between him and a daofei.
But lying was something he needed more practice at. “You’re from the
Eastern Peninsula, aren’t you?” Jianzhu said. He clasped his hands behind
his back. “I have a good friend who does a lot of business in the Eastern
Peninsula. His name is Hui. Have you met him before, by chance? Perhaps
he was the one you relayed for supplies just now?”
It had only been a twinge of suspicion on Jianzhu’s part, a bluff really,
but mentioning Hui’s name let loose a flood of tells from Saiful’s face and
body language.
“Let me guess,” Jianzhu said, digging deeper along this productive
seam of ore. “Hui sent you to infiltrate my household, didn’t he? With
orders to find out what happened to the Avatar.”
The slight step backward Saiful took let Jianzhu know that he’d struck
upon the truth. “And being the smart young man you are, you realized the
implication of the shirshu trail ending here. The Avatar—and, let’s be clear,
we have been following the Avatar—has been lost to outlaws. That was the
message you sent to Hui just now.”
Saiful was astonished that Jianzhu had performed the supernatural feat
of reading his mind. Really, all Jianzhu had done was follow lines of
information as they unfolded, like any good Pai Sho player.
The swordsman decided to follow a gambit of his own. He’d been found
out, but they were in the isolated mountains, and he had his weapon and his
youthful reflexes on his side. He warily drew his dao again.
Jianzhu rolled his neck, his joints creakier than in years past. The thing
about Pai Sho was that most games didn’t need to be played to completion.
Masters usually recognized when they were beaten and resigned while the
action was still technically in progress. If this dance between him and Hui
had taken place on the grid, then right here would be where Jianzhu was
supposed to bow and pick up his tiles in defeat.
There was no stopping the message from reaching Hui now that the bird
was in the air. The chamberlain would realize how big a mess he was hiding
and assemble a case against him to the rest of the sages of the Earth
Kingdom. If the girl was found alive and her identity proven, she’d be
delivered straight into the hands of Hui, who in the end wouldn’t care which
version of the Avatar he got, so long as he was taking it from Jianzhu.
By all logical reasoning, he was ruined. He’d lost.
But what only his close Pai Sho partners knew about him was that
Jianzhu had never surrendered a game early in his life. On the rare
occasions when an opponent got the best of him, he forced them to play out
the lines to the bitter end. He made them jump hurdles for every piece of his
they captured, and ran the late-night candles down to their last inches of
wick out of sheer spite.
Jianzhu smiled grimly as he closed in on the young swordsman. Beating
him always required a price in blood. He wasn’t about to drop the habit
now.
