QUESTIONS AND MEDITATIONS
Kyoshi kept pace behind Lao Ge through the streets of the market. The two
of them were alone, a girl and her elderly uncle taking a relaxing stroll.
Nothing out of the ordinary.
Except Lao Ge, when not in the presence of the rest of the Flying Opera
Company, walked with the bearing of a dragon wrapped in the clothes of a
beggar. And Kyoshi was . . . Kyoshi. Vendors in their stalls craned their
necks to gawk at her as she passed.
“Aren’t we here to buy rice?” she muttered, feeling the pressure of so
many gazes. “We passed two different peddlers already.”
“Any one of us could have done that alone,” Lao Ge said. He winked at
a matron sweeping her stoop. She frowned and pushed a pile of dust at him.
“You’re here to observe.”
Zigan Village was the main town that supplied food and manpower to
Governor Te’s palace. Kyoshi had been impressed by its size as they walked
in from the outskirts, but quickly noticed that the solidly built houses and
traditional Earth Kingdom trappings were somewhat of a front. They hadn’t
encountered an actual person until they were well into the heart of the
village. Kyoshi found it hard to believe that the outer districts were
completely vacant, but she’d seen nothing to the contrary.
Her ears perked toward the sound of an argument. A peddler and the
farmer supplying him were nearly at blows.
“You can’t fool me!” shouted the peddler. “I know the harvest was good
this year! What you’re charging me is an outrage!”
The farmer gestured wildly with the straw hat in his hand. “And I’m
telling you, most of it gets confiscated for the governor’s silos! I have to set
the price based on the grain I have leftover!”
“How can you keep raising prices when there’s an ocean of rice sitting
behind his walls?” The peddler was beside himself. “For Yangchen’s sake, I
can see the roof of the storehouse from here!”
“Te hasn’t opened the silos for over five years! You might as well
consider that food eaten by the spirits!”
Lao Ge pushed Kyoshi along. Apparently, they were not here to offer
solutions to people who needed them.
She knew what he was trying to prove, that Te’s impending death was
justified. “Reserving food for an emergency isn’t foolish or corrupt,” she
said.
“No, but secretly selling your reserves for off-the-books profit is. To
enrich himself, Te has traded away the grain he’s collected every year since
he was appointed governor. He’s persisted during bad harvests, when his
citizens have gone hungry enough to abandon their homes. Most famines
are man-made, and he is on the verge of making one.”
Lao Ge kicked a pebble at a shuttered window. There was no response
to the noise. “Tell me, has Jianzhu ever failed his people in this manner?”
Kyoshi was forced to admit that Yokoya had only grown and prospered
since Jianzhu planted his flag there. The townsfolk she’d seen in Zigan had
the sinking, harried look of men and women running out of time. They
weren’t starving yet, but they would be soon. She recognized the weight of
hunger on their shoulders, the same one she felt on hers as she went from
door to door in Yokoya after being dumped there, rejected in turn by every
family, her options dwindling.
She knew intimately what would happen next to the villagers. How their
humanity would break down as starvation and helplessness took over. How
it felt to watch death encroach a little closer every week. It had taken an
intervention by Kelsang to save her from that fate.
Now Lao Ge was claiming to be that mercy for Zigan, for hundreds of
people instead of just one girl. She had no reason to call him wrong.
It was a long, serpentine hike up the hillside to their encampment. She
noticed the Flying Opera Company preferred elevated positions—maybe
her mother’s influence seeping through. It made perfect sense in this
context. The rocky terrain hid them from view, and from this high up they
could see the layout of Te’s palace as clearly as a well-drawn map.
The governor is tactically incompetent not to have scouts monitoring
these passes, Kyoshi thought, before noticing the strange mix of Rangi and
Lao Ge that had rubbed off on her.
Lek looked up from stoking the campfire. “Did you get the rice?”
“We got sweet potato.” She tossed the burlap sack to the ground. “Rice
is . . . an issue.”
“I’m sick of sweet potato,” he groused.
Kyoshi ignored him and climbed higher to the flat outcropping where
Kirima and Rangi lay on their stomachs, surveying the palace. They’d come
to a temporary truce over their mutual appreciation for intelligence
gathering. Casing a joint was pretty much the same thing as planning an
assault.
She sat down behind them, unnoticed.
“We’re looking at a traditional siheyuan design dating back to the Hao
line of Earth Kings,” Rangi said to Kirima, fixated on the complex below. It
was ancient compared to the mansion back in Yokoya. There were four
courtyards instead of two. And instead of being walled by rooms in
continuous, smooth construction, it appeared as if more than a dozen houses
of varying sizes and heights had been placed end to end along square
patterns drawn in the ground. The ancient owners must have grown in
wealth over time, adding more and more extensions haphazardly, a far cry
from the singular vision Jianzhu had in constructing his own home.
It was still obscenely extravagant, especially when compared to the
declining village of Zigan. One of the courtyards held a gaudy turtle-duck
pond that was too large for its surroundings. Kyoshi knew that was a new
trend in imitation of the Fire Nation royal palace.
“There’s overlapping fields of view for the guards in each of the high
points,” Rangi said. She pointed at three lumps of roof on the closest edge.
“We have to assume they’ll be fully manned. So, coming at the best angle,
that’s three sentries we’ll have to deal with on the approach.”
“Lek can drop two of them from a distance, but the third would have
time to sound the alarm,” Kirima said. “How do you know so much about
old Earth Kingdom architecture?”
“In the academy we studied how to attack any kind of fortification,”
Rangi said. “Walled Fire temples, Earth Kingdom stockades . . .”
Kirima looked at her carefully. “Polar ice walls?”
“Yes,” Rangi said without hesitation. “Preparedness carries the day.
There was even a plan for Ba Sing Se, though I’d pity the troops who
carried it out.”
The Waterbender set aside the comments made toward the other nations.
“Mok will want to attack the south gate directly,” Kirima said. “If we time
our approach with his, we could assume the sentries posted on the other
walls will divert toward him.”
Rangi frowned. “That’s a killing field.” The ground south of the
complex was hard-packed dirt strewn with fieldstones the size of a man’s
head. “A few Earthbenders in Te’s guard could cause massive casualties.”
“I don’t think Mok cares,” Kirima said. “I don’t know what poison
Wai’s been pouring in the ears of his men, but they’ve turned into fanatics.
He’s going to breach the walls with sheer numbers.”
Kyoshi shuddered to think of the slaughter that would follow if the
daofei succeeded. She’d never heard of a siege where the attackers didn’t
repay the cost of victory in blood.
“We have one last option,” Kirima said. “We still don’t know which
building the prison cells are in, or under. Capturing the entire palace might
be the only way we get enough time to search for the person we’re trying to
free. So instead of trying to penetrate the compound, we simply take out the
watchmen on the south wall, open the gate from the inside, and let Mok
stroll right through.”
“That’s not going to happen,” Kyoshi said.
“Gah!” Kirima launched herself to her knees and nearly fell off the
outcrop. “How are you so stealthy on those giant hooves of yours?”
“Servants have to be quiet.” Kyoshi appraised the pair of benders, who
were probably more alike than either cared to admit. She needed some
wisdom in a hurry. The conventional sort, not the turned-around mind
games of Lao Ge. Right now, these two women were her best sources.
“We have to talk,” she said to them.
The last hours of daylight were devoted to more training. The training never
ended. The training would invade her dreams. She was certain the next Fire
Avatar would be born with her muscle memory imprinted in their little fire-
baby limbs.
“Let’s go already!” Wong shouted. “You’re the one who wanted to learn
dust-stepping.”
“Are you sure about this?” Kyoshi said, justifiably nervous. “When I
saw the rest of you do it, you started on solid ground and worked your way
higher. That seems a lot safer.”
She perched on a rock column, one of many that studded a ravine. The
distance between each pillar was at least twelve feet. On the far side of the
gully, Wong waited for her.
“Practice should be more difficult than the real thing,” he said. “The
goal is to reach me without slowing down. If you stumble you have to go
back to where you started and try again. You’re doing it three times.”
Kyoshi peered down at the ground below. There was nothing that would
break her fall on the hard stone floor. “Can I at least use my fans?”
“I don’t know,” Wong said. “Can you?”
She pulled her weapons from her belt. The heft in her hands was
comforting as she spread them open. She had the thought that maybe if she
flapped hard enough, she could take to the air like a bird.
“Either shoot or go hungry,” Lek called out.
She should have just went for it without hesitating. Now she’d drawn an
audience. The entire group, including Lao Ge, watched from various seats
around the camp.
Precision, she thought to herself. Timing. Precision. Timing.
She leaped into thin air. In the same instant, pebbles and dust rose from
the bottom of the ravine, stacking on each other, solidifying into a rigid
structure that only needed to support her weight long enough for her to take
her next step. She felt the ball of her foot land gracefully on the miniature,
temporary stalagmite, the fragile tower of earth.
Then she crashed right through it. She dropped like . . . well, a stone.
In her panic Kyoshi let go of her fans and reached for the column with
her hands, a drowning victim ready to pull the entire lifeboat under the
surface with her. She struck the side and bounced off, scrabbling for the top
of the column with her fingers but unable to find any purchase. Her back
collided with the formation behind her, sending her pinwheeling face-first
into the bottom of the ravine.
She lay there, a smear along the ground. Two thuds sounded, her fans
landing after her. She had a distinct feeling, mostly because she was still
alive, that someone had earthbent the ground under her to be softer, covered
the rock with a layer of sand. Her guess was Lao Ge.
“Zero,” she heard Wong call out. “Start over.”
Every attempt at dust-stepping failed. Painfully. It was so bad that Rangi
relented and let Kirima try teaching her to use water as a support instead of
earth. That meant Kyoshi still ended up sprawled on the ground, only
wetter.
“Maybe you should sit the mission out,” Lek said after a particularly
brutal fall. For once he was speaking out of genuine concern instead of
taunting her.
“I don’t think she can,” Kirima said. “The only decent plans we came
up with require all of us working together.”
“I think there’s ways we can make use of Kyoshi’s raw power,” Lao Ge
said. He hadn’t offered any opinions on the matter until now. “She may be a
hammer on a team of scalpels, but sometimes a brute-force approach is
necessary. I’ll babysit her on the raid.”
Kyoshi almost had to admire the way the old man spun events into the
patterns he desired, a weaver looking at raw flax and seeing the cloth it
would become. “Maybe that would be for the best,” she said. “We can keep
each other out of trouble.”
Each night, Kyoshi looked at the moon growing fuller, as if it were gorging
on her dread. The date of the raid drew nearer and nearer, and the mood
around camp turned grim. Roles had been determined, rehearsals walked
through using props of nut shells and loose coins laid on diagrams traced in
the ground. The gnawing in Kyoshi’s stomach had little to do with hunger,
and cold sweat kept her awake no matter her distance from the campfire or
how close Rangi slept near her.
On the bright side, the two most useless members of the group being
paired up gave Kyoshi and Lao Ge plenty of time to talk in private.
“Haven’t you wondered why Mok’s goal isn’t to kill Governor Te?” Lao
Ge asked, moments after he ordered her to sit and meditate with him.
The thought had crossed Kyoshi’s mind. “He knows you’re going to do
it?”
Lao Ge laughed. “And I used to believe you didn’t have a sense of
humor. No, the reason is that he has the same piece of information I do.
Palaces built in the Hao period often had an iron saferoom hidden in their
depths. In case of an attack, the lord of the manor would flee there and lock
himself behind impenetrable metal doors. The vaults had supplies to last a
month, which was more than enough time for reinforcements to arrive. Mok
knows trying to kill the governor would be a waste of effort.”
The more Kyoshi heard about this Te person, the more she despised
him. She opened her eyes. “He’s going to abandon his household to an army
of daofei?”
“What did you expect from a wealthy official?” Lao Ge said. “You
sound disappointed. Perhaps you assumed Te would stride onto the field of
battle at great risk to himself and fight off Mok’s forces single-handedly
with an incredible display of earthbending, protecting scores of innocent
lives? I don’t know where you got that image from.”
Her hackles rose. It seemed like the old man never let an opportunity to
sing Jianzhu’s praises go by. She tried to calm herself by returning to her
meditation.
Kyoshi had been denied access to this kind of training in Yokoya, but
Rangi had found moments to teach her the basics on their journey. With
their bloody task looming over her head, she found the practice calming,
centering. She was like cool stone deep below the—
“So you’re telling me you’ve never wondered about my age?”
Now he was trying to goad her on purpose. It was astounding how
easily he flipped from the hypnotic, terrifying vision she knew he could be
into an oafish child with wrinkles and white hair. She was wrong to have
thought that calling him sifu a few times would have given her consistent,
uninterrupted access to a guru of death.
“I can’t say that I have,” Kyoshi muttered through her teeth.
He sounded slightly wounded by her lack of interest in his secrets. “It’s
just . . . the people who’ve openly confronted me in the past with the name
‘Tieguai the Immortal’ . . . to a man, they all begged me for the secrets of
longevity. The only ones who didn’t were you and your mother.”
First, she didn’t believe he was anywhere near as old as he claimed.
And second, desperately grasping for more power and control over life was
what people like Jianzhu did. Te too, probably.
“Sifu,” she drawled. “Oh, please, impart upon me the mysteries of
immortality, for I wish to watch eras pass before my eyes like the grains of
an hourglass.”
“Of course!” Lao Ge said brightly. “Anything for my dear student. You
see, it all comes down to maintaining order. Keeping things neat, clean, and
tidy.”
“Excuse me?” This was genuinely offensive to Kyoshi, as a former
housekeeping servant. She’d let go of her standards for cleanliness the first
morning outside of Yokoya, after waking up covered in Pengpeng’s shed
fur. But with his drinking and aversion to changing clothes, Lao Ge toed the
line of rancidity. What did he know about tidying up?
“Aging is really just your body falling apart, on the smallest, most
invisible levels, and neglecting to put itself back together,” he said. “With
the right mental focus, you could take an inventory of your own body and
place each little piece that’s not where it should be back into the correct
order.”
Kyoshi had to assume he was tailoring his lessons to her background
and that the real process was much more complicated. “The way you
describe it, you’d have to decide what version of yourself you’d be stuck as,
forever.”
“Exactly! Those who grow, live and die. The stagnant pool is immortal,
while the clear flowing river dies an uncountable number of deaths.”
“Is that another proverb of Shoken’s? Because it doesn’t sound like any
spiritual lesson I’ve heard.”
“It’s my proverb,” Lao Ge whined, his feelings hurt again. “All this
fretting about spirits. I’m trying to teach you about the mind. An infinite
world that’s been neglected by far too many explorers.”
The mind. Kyoshi’s mind drifted to another existence, one where she
was sitting happily across from Kelsang in a green field as he told her about
the wonders of the Spirit World. His warm and gentle voice guiding her
consciousness until they crossed the boundary, hand in hand, to a land
where human concerns couldn’t weigh them down.
She’d lost that. She’d lost him, and the sickness that followed would
never fully heal. Kelsang’s absence had put her in stasis. If Lao Ge wanted
her to be stagnant and forever trapped, she’d already mastered the lesson.
Kyoshi looked at this substitute who sat before her, the strange joke she
got instead of her true teacher. It was an exchange poor enough to make her
weep. “Spirit creatures are more interesting than mental riddles,” she said.
“My dear,” Lao Ge said softly. “As you’ll discover one day, the mind
has specters of its own.”
