THE CHALLENGE
“We have to do something!” Rangi said. “This is our fault!”
“It might be our fault, but it’s definitely not our problem,” Kirima
muttered as she hastily packed her portion of their camp. “It’s not our
problem.” She repeated it like a mantra that might keep them safe from
harm.
“I don’t understand,” Lek said. “Who is this Xu Ping An guy? Who are
the Yellow Necks? I thought we were dealing with the Autumn Bloom.”
“The Yellow Necks are business that we don’t want any part of,” Wong
said. He rolled up the sleeping blankets with tight, nervous hand motions.
“They’re not in this life for money or freedom. They take glee in pillage
and destruction. They’re wanton killers. And Xu Ping An is their brains,
heart, and soul.”
“He was a bloodthirsty madman before he spent the last eight years
locked up and dreaming about revenge,” Kirima said. “We heard the stories.
He used to call himself the General of Pandimu and claimed its residents
were beholden to him for the protection he provided.”
Lek scratched his head. “Where’s Pandimu?”
“Nowhere!” Kirima said. “It’s the name for the world he made up
himself! My point is he’s unhinged!”
Earlier, as they’d mumbled excuses about needing to leave the company
of the Yellow Necks, Xu had seemed easygoing, without Mok’s pettiness or
Wai’s outbursts of violence. He’d assured them that though he wished to
throw a feast in their honor, a little show of appreciation, anything really,
they were free to go with all debts to the Autumn Bloom and Yellow Necks
repaid.
Kyoshi knew that veneer of civility meant nothing. Men like Xu simply
waited for the right moment to drop it and reveal the beast behind the
curtain.
“I don’t know how he’s alive,” Rangi said. She paced in circles around
the remnants of the campfire. “I’ve read copies of reports sent to the Earth
King by Jianzhu himself. Xu was listed among the dead at the Battle of
Zhulu Pass. This doesn’t make sense!”
Kirima kept her argument directed at Kyoshi. “Look, they’re—what?—
a couple hundred strong now, at the most? Fewer, since the Kang Shen
decided to dine on rocks? They’re not an army like they were in the past.
We can simply wait until the governors summon a militia force to deal with
them. I bet Te is the one who rides out to meet him.”
Governor Te was currently riding at the head of a one-man column in
nothing but his pajamas. It wasn’t clear whether Kirima and the others
knew how old he was. But he could be a hundred, and he still wouldn’t
know how to deal with a man who’d given Jianzhu fits.
“That sounds perfect to me,” Lek said. His face was unrecognizably
dark. “The more dead lawmen, the better.” He left the camp to get
Pengpeng ready for departure, satisfied with his contribution to the debate.
“Xu first started out with smaller numbers than he has now,” Rangi said.
“If more Yellow Necks come out of hiding and rally to his banner, we’re
back to the dark days after Kuruk died.”
“We’re not back to anything!” Kirima shouted. “Xu is the abiders’
problem! As far as we’re concerned, he’s a finished job! You don’t go back
to a job you’ve already finished!”
“Years ago, I passed through a town caught in the wake of the Yellow
Necks,” Lao Ge said, reminiscing calmly like it had been a mediocre
vacation he’d once taken. “I saw what happened to the residents. They’d
been . . .” He twisted his mouth, trying to decide what word to use before
settling on one. “Stacked,” he said. He made a layering motion with his
hands, alternating one on top of the other.
Kirima still wasn’t swayed. “We run away from trouble,” she said. “Not
toward it. That’s our policy. It served us well in Chameleon Bay, it helped
us survive in Hujiang, and it’ll pay off here.”
“What do you think we should do, Kyoshi?” Lao Ge said. “Given your
newfound taste for making decisions of life and death?”
His question was dripping with petulance. But the rest of the gang
didn’t know about the botched assassination. They were still thinking of her
command to preserve the lives of Te’s household while pulling off the raid.
No one had argued against her back then.
It didn’t seem like they would now either. The group fell silent as they
waited on Kyoshi’s response, offering her the chance to tilt the scales
conclusively.
Her head swam. A single moon ago, she was the weak link, not the shot
caller. The others were putting too much stock in her being the Avatar.
Conflating bending versatility with leadership. She’d grown more capable
in the days since Hujiang, but not wiser.
Kyoshi fell back on the one philosophy she was well-versed in as an
Earthbender. Neutral jing. “We wait and see what happens,” she said. “But
we can wait from a higher elevation. Load up Pengpeng.”
Rangi and Kirima, the two opposite voices in her ear, united to share a
worried look with each other.
They loitered in the air, a physical stamp of Kyoshi’s indecision on the
blue-and-white cloth of the sky. Pengpeng floated inside a cloud that
Kirima had pulled around them. The Waterbender stood upright in the
saddle, swirling her arms to prevent the tufts of vapor from parting and
revealing their position.
Lek took them slowly over the Yellow Necks so they could monitor the
movements of Xu’s force. Kyoshi was keenly aware that they occupied a
literal halfway point between fleeing and staying, perhaps ruining their
chances for either option. She shook the nagging doubt out of her head and
peered down below.
The column of men drifted slowly away from Te’s palace like ants on
the march. They formed a solid mass, Xu no doubt at the front, with the
occasional scout sprinting ahead and returning back to report. A colony
sending out feelers.
“I hope they’re heading toward a militia outpost,” Lek said, still
clinging to some ember of hate for the law. “Then we could see a good
dustup from here.”
“They’ve stopped by a rice field,” Rangi said. “Maybe they’re trying to
pick it? The second harvest wouldn’t be ready though.” The farming
knowledge of Yokoya had rubbed off on her.
Kyoshi watched as the crops provoked some kind of response in the
daofei. Years ago, when she was still living without a roof over her head,
she would sometimes watch her fellow insects crawl through the dirt in
search of food. The motions of the bugs always started slow,
indistinguishable from randomness, full of hesitant backpedaling, until
within the span of a fingersnap they turned into a focused swarm. The army
lingered next to the green, burgeoning grain as if the collective had sniffed a
target of interest.
Dark lines began to grow across the field. She puzzled over their
meaning until she realized it was Xu’s scouts infiltrating through the high
stalks of rice, parting and trampling the plants. Her eyes darted to the
opposite end of the field where a small house and barn stood. Smoke from
the morning’s water boil puffed gently out the chimney.
Kyoshi had been so preoccupied with the safety of the household staff
of the palace that she’d forgotten about the people outside the moat. Large
estates often had tenant farmers managing their private lands. In that little
house was a family. A target for eight years of Xu’s pent-up wrath.
Trying to split the difference with neutral jing had been the wrong
choice. “I made a mistake,” Kyoshi said. “We have to get down there.
Now.”
Kirima made a choking, indignant noise. “What, exactly, are we going
to do?”
The lines had nearly crossed the rice field. “I don’t know!” Kyoshi said.
“But I can’t stay up here and watch anymore! Drop me off and fly away if
you have to!”
A scream came from the house. The occupants had spotted the daofei
closing in on them. The memory of swordsmen wearing yellow around their
necks likely still haunted this region of the Earth Kingdom.
Kirima swore and mashed her fist against the saddle floor. “No,” she
said. “If you go, we go.” She flicked the cap of her water skin open and
pulled the cloud vapor inside, condensing it into ammunition.
“Once we hit the ground, we’ll follow your lead,” Wong said to Kyoshi.
Lek groaned but brought Pengpeng around in a tight turn, descending as
fast as it was safe to. The others gripped the edges of the saddle and hung
on for dear life.
“Thank you,” Rangi said to Kirima, the wind whipping her words,
forcing her to shout. It was the nicest she’d ever been to the Waterbender.
“You’re true companions of the Avatar.”
“What good is that if we’re dead?” Kirima yelled back. Though she
blushed, just a bit.
Please don’t let us be too late, Kyoshi prayed as they sprinted toward the
barn. She’d chosen that building over the house, remembering the setup in
Hujiang. The tiny hut wouldn’t have fit a big enough audience for Xu and
Mok’s grandstanding tastes.
The contingent of daofei stuck outside the doors sprang to their feet in
alarm, but relaxed as they drew closer. The paint still caked on their faces
made the Flying Opera Company instantly recognizable. The ghosts in red
and white were honored guests of their boss. Kyoshi pushed deeper inside.
She could see over the heads of the crowd to an empty space in the back
where Xu probably was and shoved her way through until she found him.
The leader of the Yellow Necks sat on a bench, calmly reading a book.
He must have missed literature in prison and taken it from the house.
Against the wall behind him, Mok and Wai stood guard over a woman and
her son, who couldn’t have been older than seven or eight, cowering and
sobbing to themselves, dressed in simple farmers’ garb.
They’d been beaten, their faces bruised and bloody. Her anger at Xu
laying hands on a child paled before the sight of what he’d done to the
boy’s father.
The daofei had tied the tenant farmer up and hung him by the wrists
over the rafters with a long rope, several men holding on to the other end so
they could raise and lower him at Xu’s command. Underneath, they’d set up
a fire and a rendering cauldron full of boiling water. It was big enough that
if they dropped him, he’d be fully submerged in the vessel. The farmer’s
big toes dangled in the liquid, and he screamed through his gag.
Kyoshi ran up and kicked the heavy cauldron over, spilling water in the
direction of the daofei holding the rope. They let go, and she caught the
farmer in her arms. She heard the hiss of blades being drawn as she laid the
man on dry ground, twitching in pain but still alive.
Xu didn’t look up from his book. “You spilled my tea,” he said. He
licked his finger and turned another page.
She’d come to the conclusion that Mok’s affected nonchalance was a
pale imitation of his elder brother’s. Xu had probably learned it from
someone else. Like Te, they were all copying their predecessors, in a cycle
that went on and on. Kyoshi drew strength from the fact that her own links
went back further, among the most righteous in history.
“Xu!” she shouted. “Stop this! Let them go!” She heard shuffling
behind her and a familiar, reassuring warmth. Rangi and the Flying Opera
Company stood at her side.
Xu clapped his book shut and stared at Kyoshi. He’d combed his long
hair and cropped his beard as best he could.
“First off, it’s Uncle Xu to you,” he said. “And second, this man is an
abider. He worked for those who imprisoned me. He grew their grain and
took their coin, which makes him another weight on the scales I must
balance. If you can’t handle this, you’re not going to like what I do to the
town of Zigan.”
Kyoshi’s fists tightened. If they were playing roles, then she would
imitate the strongest, the bravest, the best. “You don’t get Zigan,” she
snarled. “You don’t get any town in the Earth Kingdom, nor this farmhouse
for that matter. You get the free air you can fit in your lungs, and nothing
else.”
She heard her friends tense up beside her. Xu preemptively waved off
the daofei who were ready to hack her to bits.
“Kyoshi, was it?” he said. “Kyoshi, I’m eternally grateful to you and
your compatriots for rescuing me. But you’re young, and that’s why you
don’t understand. Eight years of my life were stolen from me. Thousands of
my followers. At your tender age, what would you know about that kind of
injustice?”
They’re all the same, Kyoshi thought. Every single one. Whether they
clothe themselves in business or brotherhood or a higher calling only they
can see, it doesn’t matter. They’re one and the same.
“A lesser man might quit in the face of a setback that large,” Xu said.
“But not me. I relish the work, not the reward. I will get what I am owed.”
They look at themselves like forces of nature, as inevitable ends, but
they’re not. Their depth is as false as the shoals at low tide. They twist the
meaning of justice to absolve themselves of conscience.
Xu smiled benevolently and tried to find his spot in the book again.
“The world is on the verge of forgetting my name. Which means I didn’t
carve the scars deep enough last time. I’ll do better with the second chance
you’ve given me, Kyoshi.”
He motioned at Wai, who still hovered over the mother and son. Wai
shoved the woman onto her hands and knees and yanked her head back by
her hair, exposing her throat. She screamed.
They’re humans like us, made of skin and guts and pain. They need to
be reminded of that fact.
“I SAID STOP!” Kyoshi shouted. There was a backing to her voice that
punched through the air. Wai hesitated, remembering the last time he’d
drawn his knife in her presence.
Kyoshi pointed at Xu. “Xu Ping An! I challenge you to face me on the
lei tai, immediately!”
It was the one idea that could have forestalled both him and his army
from exploding into a frenzy of violence. Maybe Xu didn’t think much of
Kyoshi, but he had to respect the challenge. The Code that empowered him
in the eyes of his followers demanded it.
There was silence from the crowd as her words sunk in, but Xu
responded as if it were the most normal request in the world. “Challenges
are meant to settle grievances,” he said, dabbing the pad of his forefinger
with his tongue again. “What insult have I given you?”
“Your existence,” Kyoshi spat.
She didn’t know it was possible for a group of hardened killers to gasp
collectively. Now Xu paid her mind. He put the book down and stood up.
His men parted to form an aisle between him and the barn door. Only
Kyoshi and the Flying Opera Company stood in the middle, barring the
way.
“Bending or without?” Xu asked, perfectly at ease.
“Bending,” Kyoshi said. It was the only way she’d stand a chance. She
remembered her fans in her belt. “Weapons. Anything goes.” She felt the
flare and turmoil of Rangi’s emotions beside her but heard no protest.
“Very well, then.” The prospect of a duel registered on Xu about as
much as a fly landing on his nose. Perhaps he’d already assessed her
abilities and that was the amount of threat she represented. “Let’s get this
over with.”
It was a lopsided arrangement. Six on one side of the rice field, hundreds on
the other. In the middle, a team of Yellow Necks used shovels from the barn
to pile dirt into a raised platform. With an earthbending lei tai, the fighting
surface had to be shaped from the element, not made of wood like the one
in Hujiang.
Kyoshi had declined to assist with construction in the hope that stalling
would create more time for a governor’s militia, an Earth Kingdom army,
for any help at all to arrive. At this point, she’d take Te and a couple of
angry servants armed with brooms.
“This was your plan?” Kirima said as they watched the dirt flinging into
the air.
“It wasn’t a plan so much as a thing that could have happened and did,”
she said. “I noticed none of you tried to stop me.”
“There’s little else you can do,” Wong said. “Especially if you want to
stop him from razing Zigan to the ground. It’s right next door, and the
nearest Earth Kingdom army outpost is a five days’ march away.”
Kyoshi stepped behind Rangi and embraced her, feeling her warmth.
None of the others commented on their closeness. “I’m sorry I keep doing
this to you,” she muttered, her lips close to the Firebender’s ear.
Rangi leaned back into her. “Today you get a pass. As the Avatar you
would have tangled with horrors like Xu on a regular basis. This might be
the first time you’ve done your duty since we left Yokoya.”
It felt good to get a decision right, though it was uncertain how long
she’d live to enjoy it.
“Kyoshi, can I speak to you for a moment?” Lao Ge said. “In private?”
The others frowned, slightly confused. As far as they knew, there was
no particular relationship between Kyoshi and the old man that warranted a
conversation prior to her imminent death. Lao Ge was more likely to give
her a few shots of wine for courage than a pep talk.
Kyoshi followed him behind a curtain of rice stalks. “What do you think
you’re doing?” he snapped once they were alone. He’d never taken such a
tone with her, not even after she’d saved Te’s life.
“You think it’s wrong to fight Xu?” she said. If Lao Ge was going to
argue that the Yellow Necks were good for the health of the Earth
Kingdom, then he truly was as loopy as his outward persona.
“No, you fool! What I mean is that if you wanted Xu dead, you should
have struck him down without notice! Blindsided him! That is the way of
the predator!”
He seemed positively disgusted at the notion of an honorable duel.
“Facing him on the lei tai and hoping for the best is the mentality of an
herbivore braying and shaking its antlers to look good in front of the rest of
the herd,” he said. “I wanted you to drink blood, not chew grass.”
Kyoshi took a step back. She bowed deeply before him, fully and
formally, holding her angle at length. It wasn’t the deference of a student to
a teacher, but rather the rarely used apology bow, only trotted out in the
Earth Kingdom in moments of true sincerity, and she kept it going until she
heard a snort of surprise from Lao Ge.
“I’m sorry, Sifu,” she said. “But I’m not doing this as a killer. I’m doing
this as the Avatar. Even if the world won’t know it.”
Lao Ge sighed. “Stop that. You’re embarrassing both of us.” She
straightened to see his wrinkled face arranged into an expression of scorn. It
was ruined only by the genuine concern in his eyes. “Figures that the one
time I find a pupil I like, she tries to be as mortal as possible,” he groused.
“Well . . . maybe Xu might suddenly pass away where he stands in the
next five minutes?” Kyoshi said to any spirit or legendary creature of death
nearby that might overhear and take pity on her.
“Death doesn’t work like that,” Lao Ge said. He reached up and patted
her on the shoulder. “You’re on your own.”
The daofei finished stamping the platform flat. It was smaller than the one
in Hujiang. There would be less room to run.
Xu hopped onto the lei tai first, swinging his arms to loosen his
shoulders. He’d changed into a vest and a pair of pants cinched at the
ankles. Mok and Wai stood in his corner, the elevation of the platform
hiding them from the chest down.
“If anything happens, take Pengpeng and get out of here,” Kyoshi said
in an ironic echo of what Rangi had once told her. “Find someone with the
power to intervene before the Yellow Necks grow their numbers again.”
“What if it’s the Gravedigger?” Kirima asked.
Kyoshi paused. She wondered if her hatred would follow her into the
afterlife, whether the purity of her revenge was so important that she’d turn
away his help in saving lives.
She didn’t answer the question. Instead she gave Rangi one last squeeze
and hopped onto the platform. She was still geared from last night’s battle.
The face paint had started to flake off.
Kyoshi steadied her trembling fingers against the handles of her fans.
The stagelike nature of the lei tai added the tension of a performance to the
stakes of a duel. Had Rangi been this scared, elevating herself to fight?
Facing Tagaka had been less nerve-wracking than this. The battle on the ice
had happened too fast for her to think each step through.
You weren’t as afraid back then because Jianzhu was there, on your
side. The thought held too much truth for her to swallow. She drew her
weapons.
Xu grunted and sighed as he hugged one knee to his chest and then the
other. “For the last time, Kyoshi,” he said. “Are you sure about this?”
You and your friendliness can go straight to the bottom of the ocean.
“You should ask yourself that question,” she said. “I think your kind has a
little too much certainty.”
An unnamed young daofei, rather than Mok or Wai, stood nervously in
between them with his hand raised. Kyoshi spread her fans and settled into
a Sixty-Forty stance that Wong had taught her, equally good for striking or
bending. Xu bounced lightly on the balls of his feet, preferring not to signal
his approach to earthbending.
“Ready!” the referee shouted.
Kyoshi licked a drop of sweat off her lip. It tasted like grease. She
scuffed a little more weight into her front foot. Xu began to inhale through
his nose.
“Begin!” the young man shouted, before diving off the platform to
safety.
Kyoshi summoned her energy, starting with her connection to the
ground and extending it through her weapons. She would overwhelm her
opponent with a barrage of earth.
But she was too slow. And she was playing the wrong game entirely. Xu
thrust his arms forward, two fingers extended from each hand, and struck
her fans with a bolt of lightning.
