DUES
Her spine nearly snapped itself in two. Each drop of her blood had been
stung by a viper bat. Her hands felt numb and tacky. The skin had been
burned off them.
There was a thump and a jolt through her body. An eternity later, she
realized it was her knees hitting the ground as she collapsed. The rest of her
torso followed. Her headdress went tumbling as her jaw impacted against
the platform.
With the side of her face pressed against the dirt, sounds were
amplified. She heard more than one person screaming. Rangi, for certain.
Would the others be that saddened? It was hard to say. She caught a glimpse
of them and saw only sheer bewildered horror on their faces, the inability to
comprehend what kind of element she’d been struck with.
Xu walked over to the side her face was pointing, blocking her view.
She had never heard of bending lightning, never been struck by it, but that
was the only explanation for what she’d seen, cold-blue crackling zigzags
running from his fingers into her body. She tried to get to her hands and
knees but collapsed, her chest flat against the ground.
“Remember,” Wong said from the distant past, a blur of hazy
recollection. “It’s over when the winner says it’s over.”
Xu planted his feet and shot another bolt of lightning straight into her
back.
“It didn’t have to be this way,” he shouted. He punctuated his sentence
by sending a third and a fourth blast of lightning pulsing into her body. He
intended to cook her corpse beyond recognition. “You had the greatest gift
in the world. My respect. And you threw it away. For what?”
He kicked her in the shoulder, a meaningless act other than to show his
disdain. “Don’t think I didn’t notice how you’ve looked at me since last
night,” he said. “Staring at me with condemnation in your eyes. What you
don’t understand is that men like me are beyond judgment! I do as I will,
and the world must bear my discretions with submission and gratitude!” A
fifth bolt, for emphasis.
What Xu didn’t seem to know was that none of the lightning strikes
beyond the first had hurt to the same degree. Kyoshi played dead while she
came to her senses. There was still a searing heat that enveloped her upper
half, separated by a layer of fabric. Her survival could have had something
to do with the chainmail in her jacket, exposed by the tears and scrapes
from last night’s raid. Better to stay pressed against the ground until she
saw an opening.
Xu breathed in again and shot a continuous stream of lightning at a
target he thought was surely dead. Kyoshi smelled her clothes smoking as it
washed over her body. He was desecrating her.
“Stop!” she heard Rangi cry from far away. “Please stop!”
It was the hopelessness in her voice that set Kyoshi over the edge, the
complete surrender of a girl who would have been invincible if not for her
love. Kyoshi had put that weakness in Rangi, and Xu had torn it open. He
was torturing the person Kyoshi cared about most in the world.
And by every spirit of every star in the night sky, he would pay for that.
She reached out and grabbed Xu’s ankle. The sudden course of
lightning into his own body made him squeal, an undignified, high-pitched
noise that was music to her ears. He stopped the flow in time to be dumped
on his back, Kyoshi completely upending him.
Her eyes felt like they were leaking. Not with tears but light. She
thought briefly about swinging Xu overhead and dashing him against the
ground or twisting him like a wet rag between her bare hands. He was
surely more fragile than a solid iron bar.
No. He needed to be shown what a true force of nature looked like. His
men had to see him beaten not by strength but by retribution from the
elements themselves. She switched her grip on him from his foot to his
collar.
She rose into the air, not with dust-stepping but a whirling vortex that
sucked her higher into the sky. Xu screamed and dangled from her grip. The
tornado she rode blew the daofei back. From this distance they were so tiny
and pathetic and human.
Kyoshi extended her free hand, palm upward, and the stalks of rice
around Xu’s men set ablaze. She curled her fingers closer together, and the
flames, accelerated by her winds, hemmed them in. Many of the outlaws
shrieked and threw themselves on the ground, rolling to put out the fires
that had caught on their clothes.
Kyoshi looked down the length of her arm at Xu. He shielded his eyes
from hers, her inner light too harsh to take in. His mouth gaped open and
shut like a fish. The air was moving too fast for him to breathe.
“You forget, Xu,” she said, and a legion of voices synchronized in the
eye of the storm. “There is always someone who stands above you in
judgment.”
It was possible that other, more powerful people spoke through her in
this moment. There was a chance she was simply a puppet beholden to their
collective will. But an unassailable feeling of control told her that wasn’t
true. The voices could lend her insight, eloquence, but they couldn’t take
over. Many of them seemed to disapprove of what she was doing.
Let them, Kyoshi thought. She was in command. She brought Xu’s face
closer to hers.
“What will you do now?” she said. “Knowing that your every step
will have consequences?”
She needn’t have asked. Behind the terror in Xu’s eyes there was a
stronger, deeper outrage. His soul lacked any porousness, and the chance
she so generously provided had washed off like rain on lacquer. How dare
she? was the only thought running through his head. How dare she?
Consequences were for his victims! He was a man who did whatever his
power let him!
Xu mistook her analyzing frown for a lapse in her guard and spat a gout
of flame in her face.
So he’s a Firebender, she thought as she diverted the flames off to the
side with a tilt of her head. A shame for him that he’d given away his
intentions so clearly and that dragon’s breath was the first act of firebending
Kyoshi had ever performed. She wasn’t as surprised as he’d expected her to
be.
The lightning generation was unique though. A refinement of the art? A
singular talent? She had so many questions for Xu about that. Too bad she
would never get the chance to ask them.
Both Lao Ge and Jianzhu were right in some measure. Shortsighted men
like Te and Xu were parasites who gnawed at the very structures they
exploited for power and survival. They were blind to the fact that they
existed not through their own merits but due to the warped form of charity
the world had decided to give them.
And Xu had exhausted his. Kyoshi was the only thing holding him up.
She opened her hand and watched him fall.
By the time she touched back down to the earth, the wall of fire that
surrounded the daofei had burned itself out. Most of the swordsmen had
taken the chance to scatter. Judging by the trails trampled through the crops,
they’d fled in every direction, a routed army without a leader. Mok was
gone. He and a few others had dragged off Xu’s body before disappearing
into the rice stalks.
Surprisingly, Wai still remained. He stared at Kyoshi, transfixed, his jaw
agape. Reverent. Kyoshi didn’t know what to make of the cruel, unusual
man. He seemed to constantly need a powerful figure to tell him what to do.
“Begone,” she said with the last of the echoes in her throat.
Wai made the fist-over-hand gesture and bowed deeply to her. He and
the remaining daofei, mostly survivors of the massacred Kang Shens, faded
away into the fields.
Kyoshi looked around for her friends and couldn’t see them. “Are you,
uh, still possessed?” she heard Lek say, his voice muffled as if speaking
through a porthole. “Or are you you again?”
“Will you please just show yourselves?” she snapped.
There was a grinding noise as they rose into view. Wong had bent them
a shelter to hide in below the surface, the same way Jianzhu had survived
when she’d first lost control and entered the Avatar State. She wanted to tell
them that this time, she hadn’t gone berserk. She’d been fully aware of her
powers heightening with whatever vast reserves of energy the Avatar had
access to.
She’d been fully aware of killing Xu.
If Rangi wanted to embrace her, she restrained herself well. She and the
others stood before Kyoshi, stiff and hesitant. They’d known her, had gotten
accustomed to the idea that their inexperienced friend could bend all four
elements, but they hadn’t really seen the Avatar before, until now.
“Don’t do this,” Kyoshi said. “Please. If you act like this, I won’t be
able to . . .” Her knees buckled.
Not this time, she thought to herself. Stay awake. Be present for what
you have done. Look at your actions instead of turning away.
“Kyoshi, your hands,” Rangi said, aghast.
She held them in front of her face. They were riddled with burns from
where the lightning had struck her fans.
“We have to get her to a healer!” Kirima shouted, her sharp face already
losing its edges as Kyoshi’s vision blurred.
“Kyoshi!” Lek said, suddenly close to her, propping her up as best he
could from underneath her arm, the last person among them who should
have tried to hold her up physically. “Kyoshi!”
She lasted less than two minutes before succumbing to the pain.
